The Project Gutenberg eBook of Forest Trees of Illinois (Third Edition), by
Robert H.  Mohlenbrock

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Forest Trees of Illinois (Third Edition)

Author: Robert H.  Mohlenbrock

Release Date: June 26, 2021 [eBook #65705]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOREST TREES OF ILLINOIS (THIRD
EDITION) ***




                              Forest Trees
                              of Illinois


                             THIRD EDITION


                        By Robert H. Mohlenbrock
           Department of Botany, Southern Illinois University

      Photography by John A. Richardson and Robert H. Mohlenbrock
       Illustrations by Miriam Wysong Meyer and Fredda J. Burton
                      Southern Illinois University

             Printed by authority of the State of Illinois
                               Issued by
                       DEPARTMENT OF CONSERVATION
                          Division of Forestry

                                   14
                            (17943—10M—4-80)




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


  Acknowledgments                                                      4
  Introduction                                                         5
  Illustrated Glossary                                                 6
  Key to the Trees of Illinois in Spring, Summer, and Fall             9
  Key to the Trees of Illinois in Winter                              27
  Trees of Illinois                                                   38
  Special Places to Study Trees                                      318
  White Oak, the State Tree of Illinois                              322
  Illinois Big Tree Champions                                        323
  Index to Common and Scientific Names                               324
  District Foresters                                                 330




                            Acknowledgments


I am grateful to the late Mr. Fred Siemert, State Forester of the
Illinois Division of Forestry, for suggesting the need for a new “Forest
Trees of Illinois.” The first and second editions of this work have been
immensely popular, and the need for a third edition is gratifying.

This third edition is only slightly modified from the second. A few
illustrations and bark photographs have been substituted, and the key
has been improved in places. New material has been added to the
description of the water hickory.

I wish to give thanks to Mr. Al Mickelson of the Illinois Division of
Forestry for encouraging this third edition, and to his assistants, Mr.
John Sester and Mr. Ernest Kunze, for editing it for publication. Mark
Mohlenbrock has redrawn the leaves and fruit illustrated on pages 101
and 169.




                              Introduction


The initial edition of Forest Trees of Illinois was written in 1927 by
W. R. Mattoon and R. B. Miller, two prominent foresters in the state at
that time. This was revised in 1955 by Dr. George Damon Fuller, then of
the Illinois State Museum, and E. E. Nuuttila, State Forester of
Illinois.

In 1973, I prepared the first edition of the new Forest Trees of
Illinois with new text, keys, photographs, and illustrations. An updated
second edition was published in 1978. Because of the heavy demand for
this work, this third edition has been prepared.

Woody plants are usually divided into trees and shrubs, but the
difference between these growth forms is not always distinct. In this
work, we consider a plant to be of tree stature if it has a single erect
trunk which branches above the ground to form a crown. It must have a
diameter of at least 3 inches 4½ feet above the ground and an overall
height of 12 feet. Some of the plants included in this work are
borderline between trees and shrubs. The height of a plant may be
influenced by its geography. Thus, the Gray Dogwood (_Cornus racemosa_)
in extreme southern Illinois may reach the dimensions of a small tree,
but this same species in northern Illinois is also of a shrubby stature.

Almost every kind of plant in the world is known by a Common Name and a
Latin Name. The Common Name is the one used locally by residents of the
area. It is of limited value because people in different areas sometimes
have different names for the same plant. For example, one of the trees
in Illinois is known by some as the Ironwood, by others as the Blue
Beech, by others as the American Hornbeam, and by still others as the
Musclewood Tree. Then again, the name Ironwood applies to at least two
different kinds of trees in Illinois. The Latin Name for each kind of
tree is known the World over by the same name. Actually, the Latin Name
is composed of two words, the genus name, which is always capitalized,
and the specific epithet, which is not capitalized.

Of all the kinds of plants in the World, none is so well-loved, so
stately and majestic, as a forest tree. More and more people each year
are vacationing and seeking outdoor recreation. Many of them “take to
the woods” for their leisure, because the forests of our state hold an
unending fascination to many who enter them.

Moreover, trees provide us with building material for our homes, shade
for our lawns and parks, and hundreds of other products used in our
everyday living.

To know the trees we encounter is to enhance our appreciation for them.
The purpose of FOREST TREES OF ILLINOIS is to bring to Illinoisans a
means of identifying the trees that grow in this state.




                          Illustrated Glossary


In order to distinguish one kind of tree from another, it is necessary
to learn the major characteristics which the forest trees of Illinois
may possess. Illustrated below are several of the most commonly
encountered characteristics of leaves and twigs. A thorough
understanding of these structures will insure a quicker and more
accurate identification.

On the pages following the illustrated glossary are keys to the trees of
Illinois. A key is a botanical device which enables the user, through
proper selection of a series of choices, to identify a specimen at hand.
Separate keys are provided for trees during the spring, summer, and
autumn seasons and during the winter season. Begin at the first pair of
number 1’s, choose the statement that best fits the unknown specimen,
and then go to the next pair of statements beneath. Continue this same
procedure until the name of the plant is reached.

    [Illustration: LEAF FORMS, ARRANGEMENT, SHAPES]

  LEAF FORMS AND ARRANGEMENT
    SIMPLE
    PINNATELY COMPOUND
    PALMATELY COMPOUND
    DOUBLY PINNATELY COMPOUND
    OPPOSITE
    ALTERNATE
    WHORLED
  LEAF SHAPES
    LANCEOLATE
    OBLANCEOLATE
    OBLONG
    ELLIPTICAL
    OVATE
    OBOVATE

    [Illustration: WINTER TWIG CHARACTERS]

  WINTER TWIG CHARACTERS
    BUD SCALE
    TERMINAL BUD
    LATERAL BUD
    LEAF SCAR
    LENTICELS
    BUNDLE TRACES
  {LEAF LAYERS}
    UPPER EPIDERMIS
    PALISADE LAYER
    RIBS AND VEINS
    SPONGY LAYER
    STOMA
    LOWER EPIDERMIS
  LEAF TIPS
    ACUTE
    OBTUSE
    LONG-TAPERING
  LEAF EDGES
    PINNATELY LOBED
    WAVY
    TOOTHED
    DOUBLY TOOTHED
    SMOOTH
  LEAF BASES
    HEART-SHAPED
    TRUNCATE
    ASYMMETRICAL
    ROUNDED
    TAPERING




        Key to the Trees of Illinois in Spring, Summer, and Fall


  1. Leaves needle-like or scale-like                            Group A
  1. Leaves broad and flat, never needle-like or scale-like.
    2. Leaves compound (divided into 3 or more leaflets)         Group B
    2. Leaves simple.
      3. Leaves opposite or whorled                              Group C
      3. Leaves alternate.
        4. Leaves neither toothed nor lobed                      Group D
        4. Leaves toothed or lobed or both.
          5. Leaves toothed but not lobed                        Group E
          5. Leaves lobed                                        Group F


                                GROUP A

Leaves needle-like or scale-like, often evergreen.

  1. Leaves in clusters of 2 or more.
    2. Leaves in clusters of 10 or more, falling off during autumn.
      3. Leaves blue-green; cone-scales smooth          _Larix laricina_
      3. Leaves bright green; cone-scales hairy          _Larix decidua_
    2. Leaves in clusters of 2-5, evergreen.
      4. Leaves in clusters of 5                         _Pinus strobus_
      4. Leaves in clusters of 2-3.
        5. Leaves in clusters of 2.
          6. Most or all the leaves less than 3 inches long, usually
              twisted.
            7. Leaves up to 1½ inches long; sheath at base of leaves not
                longer than ⅛ inch                     _Pinus banksiana_
            7. Leaves 2-3 inches long; sheath at base of leaves at least
                ⅓ inch long                           _Pinus sylvestris_
          6. Most or all the leaves longer than 3 inches, rarely
              twisted.
            8. Leaves mostly less than 5 inches long; cone-scale with a
                small spine                             _Pinus echinata_
            8. Leaves mostly more than 5 inches long; cone-scale without
                a spine                                 _Pinus resinosa_
        5. Leaves in clusters of 3.
          9. Leaves flexible, mostly less than 5 inches long; sheath at
              base of leaves about ¼ inch long          _Pinus echinata_
          9. Leaves stiff, mostly more than 5 inches long; sheath at
              base of leaves about 1 inch long             _Pinus taeda_
  1. Leaves solitary.
    10. Leaves evergreen, of 2 types, some of them scale-like and about
        ⅛ inch long, some of them needle-like and up to ⅓ inch long
                                                  _Juniperus virginiana_
    10. Leaves falling off in autumn, all needle-like, usually at least
        ½ inch long.
      11. Leaves 3-angled.
        12. Leaves blue-green                           _Larix laricina_
        12. Leaves bright green                          _Larix decidua_
      11. Leaves flat                               _Taxodium distichum_


                                GROUP B

Leaves broad and flat, never needle-like or scale-like, compound.

  1. Leaves alternate.
    2. Leaflets 3                                    _Ptelea trifoliata_
    2. Leaflets 5 or more.
      3. Main stalk between leaflets winged on either side
                                                        _Rhus copallina_
      3. Main stalk between leaflets not winged.
        4. Leaves with an even number of leaflets, often doubly
            compound.
          5. Leaflets not more than ½ inch wide.
            6. Pods usually 12 inches long or longer, with 6 or more
                seeds                            _Gleditsia triacanthos_
            6. Pods 1-2 inches long, with 1-3 seeds _Gleditsia aquatica_
          5. Some or all the leaflets at least one inch broad.
            7. Leaves doubly compound; leaflets smooth along the edges;
                leaves without a foul odor when crushed
                                                   _Gymnocladus dioicus_
            7. Leaves once compound; leaflets usually with a few coarse
                teeth along the edges; leaves with a foul odor when
                crushed                            _Ailanthus altissima_
        4. Leaves with an odd number of leaflets, once compound (twice
            compound in _Aralia spinosa_, which has prickly leafstalks).
          8. Leaflets without teeth along the edges.
            9. Leaflets less than 1 inch broad and 2 inches long; twigs
                with short spines at base of leaf stalks
                                                  _Robinia pseudoacacia_
            9. Leaflets up to 4 inches long and up to 2 inches broad;
                twigs without spines.
              10. Some or all the leaflets alternate; base of leafstalk
                  conspicuously swollen               _Cladrastis lutea_
              10. All the leaflets opposite; base of leafstalk not
                  swollen                                  _Rhus vernix_
          8. Leaflets toothed along the edges.
            11. Leaves doubly compound, often with small prickles on the
                leafstalks and on some of the veins     _Aralia spinosa_
            11. Leaves once compound, without prickles.
              12. All leaves with 11 or more leaflets.
                13. Leafstalks and lower surface of leaves completely
                    smooth                                 _Rhus glabra_
                13. Leafstalks and lower surface of leaves (at least on
                    the veins) hairy.
                  14. Pith of twigs chambered when cut lengthwise.
                    15. Pith pale brown; bark dark brown, with roughened
                        ridges                           _Juglans nigra_
                    15. Pith dark brown; bark gray, with smooth ridges
                                                       _Juglans cinerea_
                  14. Pith of twigs solid.
                    16. Leaves strongly aromatic when crushed; twigs not
                        covered with velvety hairs.
                      17. Bud scales with yellow hairs; nut 1½ to 2
                          times longer than broad    _Carya illinoensis_
                      17. Bud scales without yellow hairs; nut about as
                          broad as long                 _Carya aquatica_
                    16. Leaves not aromatic when crushed; twigs covered
                        with velvety hairs                _Rhus typhina_
              12. Some or all leaves with less than 11 leaflets.
                18. Buds with 4-6 scales arranged in pairs; most of the
                    leaves with at least 9 leaflets.
                  19. Terminal leaflet without a stalk or with a very
                      short stalk; buds mustard-yellow
                                                     _Carya cordiformis_
                  19. Terminal leaflet with a well-developed stalk; bud
                      reddish-brown                     _Carya aquatica_
                18. Buds with 6 or more overlapping scales; most of the
                    leaves with fewer than 9 leaflets (except sometimes
                    in _Carya tomentosa_ and _Carya laciniosa_), never
                    with 11 leaflets.
                  20. Teeth along the leaf margin with small tufts of
                      hairs                                _Carya ovata_
                  20. Teeth along the leaf margin without small tufts of
                      hairs.
                    21. Lower surface of leaflets densely and uniformly
                        hairy.
                      22. Stalk to which leaflets are attached densely
                          hairy; bark tight, not shaggy
                                                       _Carya tomentosa_
                      22. Stalk to which leaflets are attached smooth or
                          sparsely hairy; bark shaggy at maturity
                                                       _Carya laciniosa_
                    21. Lower leaf surface smooth, or with tufts of
                        hairs in the vein axils, or sometimes sparsely
                        hairy along the veins.
                      23. Scales of buds, stalk of leaves, and young
                          twigs rusty-hairy or -scaly     _Carya texana_
                      23. Rusty hairs and scales not present.
                        24. Leaflets mostly 5; bud scales without hairs
                            at the tip; bark tight, not peeling
                                                          _Carya glabra_
                        24. Leaflets mostly 7; bud scales with hairs at
                            the tip; bark peeling at maturity
                                                          _Carya ovalis_
  1. Leaves opposite.
    25. Leaves palmately compound.
      26. Leaflets mostly 7; buds very sticky   _Aesculus hippocastanum_
      26. Leaflets mostly 5; buds not sticky.
        27. Fruit prickly; flowers yellow              _Aesculus glabra_
        27. Fruit smooth; flowers red                _Aesculus discolor_
    25. Leaves pinnately compound, or sometimes with only 3 leaflets.
      28. Leaflets usually 3, or sometimes 5; twigs green or glaucous
                                                          _Acer negundo_
      28. Leaflets usually 7 or more, sometimes 5; twigs not green.
        29. Some or all of the twigs square     _Fraxinus quadrangulata_
        29. Stems not square.
          30. Leaflets without stalks                   _Fraxinus nigra_
          30. Leaflets stalked.
            31. Stalks of the leaflets winged.
                          _Fraxinus pennsylvanica_ var. _subintegerrima_
            31. Twigs and leafstalks smooth
              32. Leaflets whitened on the lower surface
                                                    _Fraxinus americana_
              32. Leaflets green or yellow-brown on the lower surface
                                                    _Fraxinus tomentosa_


                                GROUP C

Leaves broad and flat, never needle-like or scale-like, simple, opposite
or whorled.

  1. Leaves (or some of them) in whorls of 3.
    2. Leaves with a bad odor when crushed; flowers with conspicuous
        purple spots                              _Catalpa bignonioides_
    2. Leaves without a bad odor when crushed; flowers merely lined with
        purple                                        _Catalpa speciosa_
  1. Leaves opposite.
    3. Leaves at least 6 inches long and 6 inches broad, heart-shaped at
        the base, never palmately lobed            _Paulownia tomentosa_
    3. Leaves usually less than 6 inches long and 6 inches broad, not
        heart-shaped at the base or, if slightly heart-shaped, then also
        palmately lobed.
      4. Leaves palmately lobed.
        5. Leafstalk with milky sap when broken       _Acer platanoides_
        5. Leafstalk without milky sap.
          6. Areas between leaf lobes mostly V-shaped; leaves usually
              silvery or white on the lower surface.
            7. Leaves deeply divided, the areas between the lobes
                extending more than half-way to the midvein
                                                      _Acer saccharinum_
            7. Leaves shallowly divided, the areas between the lobes
                extending less than half-way to the midvein.
              8. Leaves completely covered with a white felt on the
                  lower surface            _Acer rubrum var. drummondii_
              8. Leaves smooth or sparsely hairy on the lower leaf
                  surface                                  _Acer rubrum_
          6. Areas between leaf lobes mostly U-shaped; leaves green or
              paler on the lower surface, not white or silvery.
            9. Leaves with the edges drooping.
              10. Leaves green on the lower surface; small leafy
                  outgrowths sometimes present at the base of the
                  leafstalk                                _Acer nigrum_
              10. Leaves grayish on the lower surface; small leafy
                  outgrowths at the base of the leafstalk absent
                                                         _Acer barbatum_
            9. Leaves flat, the edges not drooping      _Acer saccharum_

      4. Leaves not lobed.
        11. Leaves toothed along the edges.
          12. Edges of leaves regularly toothed from tip of leaf to
              base; leaves usually short-pointed or rounded at the tip.
            13. Buds, leafstalks, and veins on the lower surface of the
                leaf covered with rusty hairs       _Viburnum rufidulum_
            13. Buds, leafstalks, and veins on the lower surface of the
                leaf without rusty hairs.
              14. Leaf stalks wavy along the edges    _Viburnum lentago_
              14. Leaf stalks not wavy along the edges.
                15. Branches spine-tipped           _Rhamnus cathartica_
                15. Branches not spine-tipped     _Viburnum prunifolium_
          12. Edges of leaves toothed only above the middle of the leaf;
              leaves tapering to a long point     _Forestiera acuminata_
        11. Leaves not toothed along the edges.
          16. Upper surface of leaves rough to the touch
                                                     _Cornus drummondii_
          16. Upper surface of leaves smooth.
            17. Leaves with deeply impressed veins on the upper surface;
                lower surface of leaves gray or whitish.
              18. Leaves often nearly as broad as long; flowers
                  surrounded by 4 large, white bracts; berries red;
                  twigs green                           _Cornus florida_
              18. Leaves longer than broad; flowers not surrounded by 4
                  large, white bracts; berries white; twigs gray
                                                       _Cornus racemosa_
            17. Leaves without deeply impressed veins; leaves often
                paler on the lower surface, but not gray or whitish
                                                  _Forestiera acuminata_


                                GROUP D

Leaves broad and flat, never needle-like or scale-like, simple,
alternate, neither toothed nor lobed.

  1. Most or all of the leaves more than six inches long.
    2. Leaves long-tapering to the base; winter buds elongated, about ⅛
        inch long, covered with reddish-brown hairs    _Asimina triloba_
    2. Leaves rounded or only short-tapering to the base; winter buds
        either ½ inch long and white-hairy, or rounded and yellow.
      3. Leafstalks usually more than 1½ inches long, hairy; buds nearly
          round, yellow                                 _Nyssa aquatica_
      3. Leafstalks usually less than 1½ inches long, smooth; buds
          elongated, white-hairy                    _Magnolia acuminata_
  1. Most or all of the leaves less than six inches long.
    4. Leafstalks with milky sap; twigs usually bearing small spines
        near the point of the leaf attachment         _Maclura pomifera_
    4. Leafstalks without milky sap; twigs not spiny.
      5. Leaves spicy-aromatic when crushed, twigs green
                                                     _Sassafras albidum_
      5. Leaves not spicy-aromatic when crushed; twigs usually not
          green.
        6. Leaves distinctly asymmetrical at base, usually obviously
            3-nerved from the base.
          7. Leaves usually at least twice longer than broad, rounded at
              the base                                _Celtis laevigata_
          7. Leaves usually less than twice longer than broad, more or
              less heart-shaped at the base          _Celtis tenuifolia_
        6. Leaves symmetrical at the base, with a single main vein.
          8. Leaves heart-shaped at the base, about as broad as long
                                                     _Cercis canadensis_
          8. Leaves rounded or tapering to the base, longer than broad.
            9. Many of the leaves clustered near the tips of the twigs.
              10. Leaves abruptly short-pointed at the tip
                                                       _Nyssa sylvatica_
              10. Leaves tapering to the tip.
                11. Veins of leaf deeply impressed, strongly arching
                    toward the tip of the leaf; fruit a berry
                                                   _Cornus alternifolia_
                11. Veins of leaf not deeply impressed nor strongly
                    arching toward the tip of the leaf; fruit an acorn.
                  12. Lower surface of leaves hairy; leafstalk usually
                      hairy; leaves usually one inch wide or wider
                                                    _Quercus imbricaria_
                  12. Lower surface of leaves smooth except for the
                      veins; leafstalk usually smooth; leaves usually
                      less than one inch wide          _Quercus phellos_
            9. Leaves not clustered near the tips of the twigs.
              13. Leaves usually with 10 or more pairs of veins;
                  leafstalks often 1½ inches long or longer
                                                        _Nyssa aquatica_
              13. Leaves usually with 6-8 pairs of veins; leafstalks
                  rarely as long as 1½ inches.
                14. Leaves abruptly contracted to a short point at the
                    tip.
                  15. Leaves usually about twice as long as broad; fruit
                      an orange berry about 1 inch in diameter
                                                  _Diospyros virginiana_
                  15. Leaves usually less than twice as long as broad;
                      fruit a blue berry up to ½ inch in diameter
                                                       _Nyssa sylvatica_
                14. Leaves gradually tapering to the tip
                                                   _Rhamnus caroliniana_


                                GROUP E

Leaves broad and flat, never needle-like or scale-like; leaves simple,
alternate, toothed but not lobed.

  1. Leaves asymmetrical at the base.
    2. Leaves with 3 main veins arising from the base of the blade.
      3. Edge of leaf with low, rounded teeth or merely wavy
                                                  _Hamamelis virginiana_
      3. Edge of leaf sharply or finely toothed.
        4. Most of all the leafstalks less than one inch long; trunk
            usually warty.
          5. Upper surface of leaf very rough to the touch; leaves thick
              and leathery.
            6. Leaves tapering to a long point at the tip; most or all
                of the blades 3 inches long or longer
                                                   _Celtis occidentalis_
            6. Leaves tapering to a short point at the tip; most or all
                of the blades less than 3 inches long
                                                     _Celtis tenuifolia_
          5. Upper surface of leaf smooth or only slightly rough to the
              touch; leaves thin and membranaceous.
            7. Leaves at least three times longer than broad
                                                      _Celtis laevigata_
            7. Leaves less than three times longer than broad.
              8. Some or all the leaves 3 inches long or longer
                                                   _Celtis occidentalis_
              8. Leaves less than 3 inches long      _Celtis tenuifolia_
        4. Leafstalks more than 1 inch long.
          9. Leaves smooth on the lower surface except for small tufts
              of hairs where the veins meet            _Tilia americana_
          9. Leaves hairy on the lower surface.
            10. Lower surface of leaves white       _Tilia heterophylla_
            10. Lower surface of leaves green          _Tilia americana_

    2. Leaves with one main vein arising from the base of the blade.
      11. Some of the twigs with corky wings.
        12. Some or all the leaves four inches long or longer;
            leaf-stalks more than ⅛ inch long           _Ulmus thomasii_
        12. None of the leaves four inches long; leafstalks up to ⅛ inch
            long                                           _Ulmus alata_
      11. Twigs without corky wings.
        13. Leaves very rough-hairy to the touch           _Ulmus rubra_
        13. Leaves smooth or soft to the touch.
          14. Edge of leaf doubly toothed (each tooth divided into a
              second small tooth).
            15. Leaves distinctly one-sided at the base; leafstalks
                often smooth                           _Ulmus americana_
            15. Leaves only slightly one-sided at the base; leafstalks
                hairy.
              16. Bark of trunk with sinewy ridges; fruit enclosed in
                  flat, 3-lobed bracts; lower lateral veins of leaf
                  unbranched                      _Carpinus caroliniana_
              16. Bark of trunk broken into scales; fruit surrounded by
                  inflated, bladdery bracts; lower lateral veins of leaf
                  branched                           _Ostrya virginiana_
          14. Edge of leaf singly toothed.
            17. Leaves smooth on the lower surface; leafstalks smooth
                                                          _Ulmus pumila_
            17. Leaves hairy on the lower surface, at least where the
                veins meet; leafstalks usually hairy  _Planera aquatica_
  1. Leaves symmetrical at the base.
    18. Leaves with 2-4 irregular teeth along the edges.
      19. Leaves usually with 10 or more pairs of veins; leaf stalks
          often 1½ inches long or longer                _Nyssa aquatica_
      19. Leaves usually with 6-8 pairs of veins; leaf stalks rarely as
          long as 1½ inches                            _Nyssa sylvatica_
    18. Leaves more regularly toothed with more than 4 teeth along the
        edges.
      20. Leafstalks with milky sap when broken.
        21. Leaf stalks and lower surface of leaf with long hairs
                                               _Broussonetia papyrifera_
        21. Leaf stalks and lower surface of leaf smooth or with short
            hairs.
          22. Lower leaf surface hairy between the veins   _Morus rubra_
          22. Lower leaf surface smooth or hairy only on the veins
                                                            _Morus alba_
      20. Leafstalks without milky sap when broken.
        23. Leaves at least 4 times as long as broad.
          24. Leafstalks less than ⅛ inch long; leaves irregularly
              toothed along the edges                   _Salix interior_
          24. Leafstalks more than ⅛ inch long; leaves regularly toothed
              along the edges.
            25. Leaves green on the lower surface          _Salix nigra_
            25. Leaves whitish on the lower surface.
              26. Each leaf with a pair of leaf-like stipules at the
                  base of the leafstalk              _Salix caroliniana_
              26. Each leaf without a pair of leaf-like stipules
                                                    _Salix amygdaloides_
        23. Leaves less than 4 times as long as broad.
          27. Leaves as broad as long or broader.
            28. Leaf stalks not flattened.
              29. Leaves strongly whitened on the lower surface, not
                  heart-shaped at the base                _Populus alba_
              29. Leaves not strongly whitened on the lower leaf
                  surface, heart-shaped at the base
                                                  _Populus heterophylla_
            28. Leaf stalks flattened.
              30. Leaves basically triangular in shape, coarsely toothed
                                                     _Populus deltoides_
              30. Leaves basically ovate or spherical, coarsely or
                  finely toothed.
                31. Leaves with 20 or more fine teeth along the edges
                                                   _Populus tremuloides_
                31. Leaves with up to 15 coarse teeth along the edges.
                                                 _Populus grandidentata_
          27. Leaves longer than broad.
            32. Twigs usually with sharp spines.
              33. Leaves broadest below the middle; fruit a small apple.
                34. Many of the leaves narrowly oblong to narrowly
                    elliptic                        _Malus angustifolia_
                34. Most of the leaves ovate to oval to broadly
                    lance-shaped.
                  35. Twigs and young leaves densely hairy
                                                         _Malus ioensis_
                  35. Twigs and young leaves smooth or nearly so
                                                       _Malus coronaria_
              33. Leaves broadest at or above the middle; fruit a
                  hawthorn.
                36. Leaves broadest at the middle; leafstalks one inch
                    long or longer                   _Crataegus viridis_
                36. Leaves broadest above the middle; leafstalks up to ¾
                    inch long.
                  37. Leaves leathery, smooth on both surfaces
                                                  _Crataegus crus-galli_
                  37. Leaves not leathery, usually somewhat hairy on the
                      lower surface                 _Crataegus punctata_
            32. Twigs not spiny.
              38. Some of the twigs with corky wings.
                39. Some or all the leaves 4 inches long or longer;
                    leafstalks more than ⅛ inch long    _Ulmus thomasii_
                39. None of the leaves 4 inches long; leafstalks up to ⅛
                    inch long                              _Ulmus alata_
              38. None of the twigs with corky wings.
                40. Individual teeth along edge of the leaf at least ¼
                    inch long.
                  41. Most of the veins not reaching to the tip of each
                      leaf; lower surface of leaf usually silvery-white
                                                       _Quercus bicolor_
                  41. Most of the veins projecting to the tip of each
                      leaf; lower surface of leaf green or pale, but
                      usually not silvery-white.
                    42. Leaves usually with sharp-pointed teeth.
                      43. Fruit an acorn; lower leaf surface usually
                          covered with very short hairs
                                                  _Quercus muhlenbergii_
                      43. Fruit enclosed in a prickly bur; lower leaf
                          surface smooth or nearly so _Castanea dentata_
                    42. Leaves usually with somewhat rounded teeth.
                      44. Cup of acorn at least 1 inch across; trunk
                          whitish to gray            _Quercus michauxii_
                      44. Cup of acorn less than 1 inch across; trunk
                          brown to black                _Quercus prinus_
                40. Individual teeth along edge of leaf up to ⅛ inch
                    long.
                  45. Some of the leaves produced from short, stubby
                      shoots along the main twigs         _Ilex decidua_
                  45. Twigs without short, stubby side shoots.
                    46. Leafstalks with 1 or more small glands
                        (“bumps”), usually near the point of attachment
                        to the blade.
                      47. Each tooth along the edge of the leaf bearing
                          a small, reddish-brown gland.
                        48. Some or all leaves one inch broad or
                            broader.
                          49. Leaves flat             _Prunus hortulana_
                          49. Leaves more or less folded down the middle
                                                     _Prunus munsoniana_
                        48. None of the leaves as much as one inch broad
                                                   _Prunus angustifolia_
                      47. Teeth along the edge of the leaf not bearing a
                          gland.
                        50. Leaves usually with a dull, wrinkled
                            surface; fruit a plum     _Prunus americana_
                        50. Leaves usually appearing smooth and rather
                            shiny; fruit an elongated cluster of small
                            cherries.
                          51. Teeth along edge of leaf curving inward,
                              usually rather blunt     _Prunus serotina_
                          51. Teeth along edge of leaf pointing outward,
                              usually sharp-pointed  _Prunus virginiana_
                    46. Leafstalks not bearing glands.
                      52. Leaves doubly toothed along the edges.
                        53. Bark peeling off into papery strips or
                            layers; leaves usually about two-thirds as
                            broad as long or broader.
                          54. Bark yellowish, silvery-gray, or
                              creamy-white.
                            55. Bark yellowish or silvery-gray; leaves
                                with 8 or more pairs of veins
                                                          _Betula lutea_
                            55. Bark creamy-white; leaves with no more
                                than 7 pairs of veins
                                                     _Betula papyrifera_
                          54. Bark reddish-brown          _Betula nigra_
                        53. Bark broken into small plates, or smooth and
                            sinewy, not peeling off into papery strips
                            or layers.
                          56. Bark of trunk with sinewy ridges; fruit
                              enclosed in flat, 3-lobed bracts; lower
                              lateral veins of leaf unbranched
                                                  _Carpinus caroliniana_
                          56. Bark of trunk broken into scales; fruit
                              enclosed in inflated, bladdery bracts;
                              lower lateral veins of leaf branched
                                                     _Ostrya virginiana_
                      52. Leaves singly toothed along the edges.
                        57. Leaves heart-shaped at the base.
                          58. Leaves up to six inches long and nearly as
                              broad               _Populus heterophylla_
                          58. Leaves not more than four inches long and
                              about half as broad.
                            59. Leaves bronze as they unfold; leafstalk
                                smooth              _Amelanchier laevis_
                            59. Leaves densely white-hairy as they
                                unfold; leafstalk somewhat hairy
                                                   _Amelanchier arborea_
                        57. Leaves rounded or tapering to the base, not
                            heart-shaped.
                          60. Teeth along edge of leaf widely spaced, at
                              least ¼ inch apart     _Fagus grandifolia_
                          60. Teeth along edge of leaf closely and
                              regularly spaced.
                            61. Leafstalk hairy; fruit fleshy.
                              62. Leaves shiny on the upper surface;
                                  leafstalks ½ inch long or longer
                                                   _Rhamnus caroliniana_
                              62. Leaves dull on the upper surface;
                                  leafstalks up to ¼ inch long
                                                      _Planera aquatica_
                            61. Leafstalk smooth at maturity; fruit dry
                                and variously winged.
                              63. Some of the leaves three inches long
                                  or longer; fruit 4-winged or a woody
                                  “cone.”
                                64. Leaves pointed at the tip; fruit
                                    4-winged          _Halesia carolina_
                                64. Leaves rounded at the tip; fruit a
                                    woody “cone”       _Alnus glutinosa_
                              63. Leaves less than 3 inches long; fruit
                                  surrounded by a flat wing
                                                          _Ulmus pumila_


                                GROUP F

Leaves broad and flat, never needle-like or scale-like; leaves simple,
alternate, lobed.

  1. Leafstalks with milky sap when broken.
    2. Leafstalks and lower surface of leaf with long hairs
                                               _Broussonetia papyrifera_
    2. Leafstalks and lower surface of leaf smooth or with short hairs.
      3. Lower leaf surface hairy between the veins        _Morus rubra_
      3. Lower leaf surface smooth or hairy only on the veins
                                                            _Morus alba_
  1. Leafstalks without milky sap when broken.
    4. Twigs usually with sharp spines.
      5. Leaves broadest at the middle or above the middle.
        6. Leaves broadest at the middle; lower surface of leaf smooth
            except for a few tufts of hairs near the veins
                                                     _Crataegus viridis_
        6. Leaves broadest above the middle; lower surface of leaf hairy
            throughout                              _Crataegus punctata_
      5. Leaves broadest below the middle.
        7. Leaves hairy throughout on the lower surface.
          8. Leaves mostly tapering to the base; fruit a crab apple
                                                         _Malus ioensis_
          8. Leaves rounded at the base; fruit a hawthorn.
            9. Fruit with pitted seeds; flowers appearing in late May
                and June                        _Crataegus calpodendron_
            9. Fruit without pitted seeds; flowers appearing in April or
                early May                             _Crataegus mollis_
        7. Leaves smooth on the lower surface or hairy only on the
            veins.
          10. Leaves tapering to the base.
            11. Leaves oval to ovate to broadly lance-shaped
                                                       _Malus coronaria_
            11. Leaves narrowly oblong to narrowly elliptic
                                                    _Malus angustifolia_
          10. Leaves rounded at the base.
            12. Leaves blue-green; fruit spherical or nearly so
                                                    _Crataegus pruinosa_
            12. Leaves green; fruit shaped like a little apple
                                                       _Malus coronaria_
    4. Twigs without spines.
      13. Leaves star-shaped                   _Liquidambar styraciflua_
      13. Leaves not star-shaped.
        14. Leaves 4-lobed, smooth on both surfaces
                                               _Liriodendron tulipifera_
        14. Leaves more than 4-lobed, hairy on one or both surfaces.
          15. Leaves palmately lobed and veined.
            16. Leaves densely coated with white felt on the lower
                surface                                   _Populus alba_
            16. Leaves without a coat of white felt on the lower surface
                                                 _Platanus occidentalis_
          15. Leaves pinnately lobed and veined.
            17. Lobes of leaf with bristle-tips.
              18. Leaves broadest above the middle _Quercus marilandica_
              18. Leaves broadest at or below the middle.
                19. Leaves hairy throughout on the lower surface.
                  20. Lower surface of leaves with gray hairs; base of
                      leaf blade usually broadly rounded.
                    21. Leaves with 5-11 more or less equal lobes, the
                        uppermost lobe not strongly curved
                                                  _Quercus pagodaefolia_
                    21. Leaves with 3-5 more or less unequal lobes, the
                        uppermost lobes often strongly curved
                                                       _Quercus falcata_
                  20. Lower surface of leaves with rusty hairs; base of
                      leaf blade not broadly rounded  _Quercus velutina_
                19. Leaves smooth on the lower surface or hairy only
                    next to the veins.
                  22. Leaves divided less than halfway to the middle.
                    23. Leafstalks hairy; buds hairy, gray
                                                      _Quercus velutina_
                    23. Leafstalks smooth; buds smooth, reddish-brown
                        _Quercus rubra_
                  22. Leaves divided more than halfway to the middle.
                    24. Leafstalks hairy; cup of acorn fringed around
                        the edge                      _Quercus velutina_
                    24. Leafstalks smooth; cup of acorn not fringed
                        around the edge.
                      25. Lower surface of leaves with large tufts of
                          hairs in the vein axils.
                        26. Cup of acorn saucer-shaped.
                          27. Cup of acorn up to ½ inch broad.
                                                     _Quercus palustris_
                          27. Cup of acorn more than ½ inch broad
                                                     _Quercus shumardii_
                        26. Cup of acorn top-shaped.
                          28. Cup of acorn enclosing about ⅓ the nut at
                              most                   _Quercus shumardii_
                          28. Cup of acorn enclosing more than one-third
                              of the nut         _Quercus ellipsoidalis_
                      25. Lower surface of leaves smooth or with small
                          tufts in hairs in the vein axils
                                                      _Quercus coccinea_
            17. Lobes of leaf with round tips, not bristle-tipped.
              29. Leaves smooth on the lower surface      _Quercus alba_
              29. Leaves hairy on the lower surface.
                30. Upper three lobes of leaf squarish, forming a cross;
                    twigs hairy                       _Quercus stellata_
                30. Leaves without three squarish lobes at the upper
                    end; twigs smooth or nearly so.
                  31. Edge of acorn cup with a fringe
                                                    _Quercus macrocarpa_
                  31. Edge of acorn cup not fringed     _Quercus lyrata_




                    Key to Illinois Trees in Winter


  1. Green leaves present during winter, needle-like or scale-like
                                                                 Group G
  1. Green leaves absent during winter                           Group H


                                GROUP G

  1. Leaves in clusters of 2 or more.
    2. Leaves in clusters of 5                           _Pinus strobus_
    2. Leaves in clusters of 2-3.
      3. Leaves in clusters of 2.
        4. Most or all the leaves less than 3 inches long, usually
            twisted.
          5. Leaves up to 1½ inches long; sheath at base of leaves not
              longer than ⅛ inch                       _Pinus banksiana_
          5. Leaves 2-3 inches long; sheath at base of leaves at least ⅓
              inch long                               _Pinus sylvestris_
        4. Most or all the leaves longer than 3 inches, rarely twisted.
          6. Leaves mostly less than 5 inches long; cone-scale with a
              small spine                               _Pinus echinata_
          6. Leaves mostly more than 5 inches long; cone-scale without a
              spine                                     _Pinus resinosa_
      3. Leaves in clusters of 3.
        7. Leaves flexible, mostly less than 5 inches long; sheath at
            base of leaves about ¼ inch long            _Pinus echinata_
        7. Leaves stiff, mostly more than 5 inches long; sheath at base
            of leaves about 1 inch long                    _Pinus taeda_
  1. Leaves solitary, of 2 types, some of them scale-like and about ⅛
      inch long, some of them needle-like and up to ⅓ inch long
                                                  _Juniperus virginiana_


                                GROUP H

  1. Leaf scars absent (scars which resemble leaf scars present but
      lacking bundle scars)                         _Taxodium distichum_
  1. Leaf scars present.
    2. Leaf scars in whorls of 3                          _Catalpa spp._
    2. Leaf scars opposite or alternate.
      3. Leaf scars opposite.
        4. Bundle scar 1                          _Forestiera acuminata_
        4. Bundle scars 3 or more.
          5. Bundle scars usually 9 or more.
            6. Pith hollow or sometimes chambered  _Paulownia tomentosa_
            6. Pith solid, not chambered.
              7. Twigs 4-sided                  _Fraxinus quadrangulata_
              7. Twigs not 4-sided.
                8. Twigs hairy.
                  9. Leaf scars notched at top.
                    10. Twigs with conspicuous large lenticels; trunks
                        swollen at the base         _Fraxinus tomentosa_
                    10. Twigs with inconspicuous lenticels; trunks not
                        swollen at the base         _Fraxinus americana_
                  9. Leaf scars more or less straight across at the top
                                                _Fraxinus pennsylvanica_
                8. Twigs smooth.
                  11. Leaf scars oval; buds brownish-black to black
                                                        _Fraxinus nigra_
                  11. Leaf scars half-round; buds brown.
                    12. Leaf scars notched at the top
                                                    _Fraxinus americana_
                    12. Leaf scars more or less straight across the top
                          _Fraxinus pennsylvanica_ var. _subintegerrima_
          5. Bundle scars usually 3-7 (sometimes 9 in _Acer negundo_).
            13. Leaf scars very broad, usually at least ⅓ inch across.
              14. Bark smooth                        _Aesculus discolor_
              14. Bark becoming furrowed and scaly     _Aesculus glabra_
            13. Leaf scars narrow, less than ⅓ inch across.
              15. Buds with 2 exposed outer scales.
                16. Twigs gray or gray-brown.
                  17. Buds long and narrow, at least 5 times longer than
                      broad                           _Viburnum lentago_
                  17. Buds shorter, at most 3 times longer than broad.
                    18. Buds reddish-brown.
                      19. Buds smooth or scurfy   _Viburnum prunifolium_
                      19. Buds hairy                _Viburnum rufidulum_
                    18. Buds light brown.
                      20. Buds hairy                 _Cornus drummondii_
                      20. Buds smooth or nearly so     _Cornus racemosa_
                16. Twigs purple or orange-brown.
                  21. Twigs purplish                    _Cornus florida_
                  21. Twigs orange-brown, at least usually not purplish
                                                       _Cornus racemosa_
              15. Buds with more than 2 exposed scales.
                22. Twigs green or glaucous               _Acer negundo_
                22. Twigs brown.
                  23. Buds rounded, several in a cluster; twigs red or
                      orange.
                    24. Twigs hairy        _Acer rubrum var. drummondii_
                    24. Twigs smooth.
                      25. Twigs with an unpleasant odor; bark scaly
                                                      _Acer saccharinum_
                      25. Twigs without an unpleasant odor; bark not
                          scaly                            _Acer rubrum_
                  23. Buds elongated; twigs brown or gray.
                    26. Ends of some twigs tapering to a spine
                                                    _Rhamnus cathartica_
                    26. Ends of twigs not spiny.
                      27. Twigs (at least by the time they are 2 years
                          old) pale gray-brown, dull       _Acer nigrum_
                      27. Twigs pale reddish-brown, shiny.
                        28. Buds pointed at the tip     _Acer saccharum_
                        28. Buds more or less rounded at the tip
                                                         _Acer barbatum_
      3. Leaf scars alternate.
        29. Thorns or spines present.
          30. Spines in pairs                     _Robinia pseudoacacia_
          30. Spines solitary, although sometimes branched.
            31. Spines scattered all along the twigs and branches
                                                        _Aralia spinosa_
            31. Spines not scattered all along the twigs and branches.
              32. Thorns branched                       _Gleditsia spp._
              32. Thorns unbranched.
                33. Buds pointed at the tip.
                  34. Twigs usually hairy                _Malus ioensis_
                  34. Twigs usually smooth.
                    35. Buds with reddish scales       _Malus coronaria_
                    35. Buds with chestnut-brown scales
                                                    _Malus angustifolia_
                33. Buds more or less rounded at the tip.
                  36. Terminal bud absent             _Maclura pomifera_
                  36. Terminal bud present              _Crataegus spp._
        29. Thorns or spines absent.
          37. Pith chambered, at least at the nodes.
            38. Leaf scars 3-lobed and usually with 3 groups of bundle
                scars.
              39. Pith pale brown; leaf scars without velvety hairs at
                  the top                                _Juglans nigra_
              39. Pith chocolate-brown; leaf scars with velvety hairs at
                  the top                              _Juglans cinerea_
            38. Leaf scars half-round, not 3-lobed.
              40. Pith chambered only at the nodes; stipular scars
                  present.
                41. Buds about ¼ inch long         _Celtis occidentalis_
                41. Buds about ⅛ inch long.
                  42. Twigs usually smooth; trees     _Celtis laevigata_
                  42. Twigs usually hairy; shrubs    _Celtis tenuifolia_
              40. Pith chambered between the nodes as well as at most of
                  the nodes; stipular scars absent.
                43. Exposed bud scales 2          _Diospyros virginiana_
                43. Exposed bud scales 4              _Halesia carolina_
          37. Pith solid, although sometimes with diaphragms.
            44. Pith with diaphragms.
              45. Buds without bud scales              _Asimina triloba_
              45. Buds with 1 or more scales.
                46. Bud scales 1-2; bundle scars 7 or more; stipular
                    scars present.
                  47. Bud scale 1, hairy            _Magnolia acuminata_
                  47. Bud scales 2, smooth     _Liriodendron tulipifera_
                46. Bud scales 3-several; bundle scars 3; stipular scars
                    absent.
                  48. Buds about ¼ inch long           _Nyssa sylvatica_
                  48. Buds up to 1 inch long            _Nyssa aquatica_
            44. Pith without diaphragms.
              49. Bundle scar 1.
                50. Twigs orange; bark reddish-brown     _Larix decidua_
                50. Twigs orange; bark reddish-brown    _Larix laricina_
              49. Bundle scars 2 or more.
                51. Stipular scars forming a ring around the twig
                                                 _Platanus occidentalis_
                51. Stipular scars not forming a ring around the twig,
                    or absent.
                  52. Twigs aromatic when cut.
                    53. Twigs green; buds generally smooth
                                                     _Sassafras albidum_
                    53. Twigs orange-brown; buds generally hairy
                                                          _Betula lutea_
                  52. Twigs not aromatic when cut.
                    54. Buds without scales.
                      55. Terminal buds larger than the rest of the
                          buds.
                        56. Buds rusty-hairy or gray-woolly.
                          57. Buds rusty-hairy, 2-3 times longer than
                              broad                    _Asimina triloba_
                          57. Buds gray-woolly, not much longer than
                              broad                      _Malus ioensis_
                        56. Buds smooth or, if hairy, not conspicuously
                            rusty-hairy or gray-woolly.
                          58. Leaf scars lobed; twigs without stipular
                              scars.
                            59. Buds bright yellow   _Carya cordiformis_
                            59. Buds brown or reddish-brown.
                              60. Terminal bud up to ½ inch long; twigs
                                  with orange lenticels
                                                     _Carya illinoensis_
                              60. Terminal bud up to ¼ inch long; twigs
                                  with pale lenticels   _Carya aquatica_
                          58. Leaf scars unlobed; twigs with stipular
                              scars.
                            61. Buds pale brown; twigs often zig-zag
                                                  _Hamamelis virginiana_
                            61. Buds light brown; twigs mostly straight
                                                   _Rhamnus caroliniana_
                      55. Terminal buds smaller than other buds, or
                          absent.
                        62. Pith reddish-brown; leaf scars often ½ inch
                            across                 _Gymnocladus dioicus_
                        62. Pith not reddish-brown; leaf scars less than
                            ½ inch across.
                          63. Milky sap present.
                            64. Twigs hairy.
                              65. Twigs velvety; pith yellow
                                                          _Rhus typhina_
                              65. Twigs not velvety; pith whitish
                                                        _Rhus copallina_
                            64. Twigs smooth               _Rhus glabra_
                          63. Milky sap absent.
                            66. Leaf scars completely encircling the bud
                                                      _Cladrastis lutea_
                            66. Leaf scars only partly encircling the
                                bud                  _Ptelea trifoliata_
                    54. Buds with 1 or more scales.
                      67. Buds with 1 scale                 _Salix spp._
                      67. Buds with 2 or more scales.
                        68. Bundle scar 1.
                          69. Twigs with short spur-like shoots
                                                          _Ilex decidua_
                          69. Twigs without short spur-like shoots
                                                  _Diospyros virginiana_
                        68. Bundle scars 2 or more.
                          70. Buds at least 4 times longer than broad.
                            71. Stipular scars encircling the twig, or
                                nearly so            _Fagus grandifolia_
                            71. Stipular scars not encircling the twigs,
                                or absent.
                              72. Lowermost bud scale directly above the
                                  leaf scar          _Populus deltoides_
                              72. Lowermost bud scale to one side of
                                  leaf scar.
                                73. Twigs reddish-brown, with pale
                                    lenticels      _Amelanchier arborea_
                                73. Twigs gray-brown, with dark
                                    lenticels       _Amelanchier laevis_
                                  70. Buds less than 4 times longer than
                                      broad. (Go to 74)
  74. Pith star-shaped, or triangular, or variously lobed in
      cross-section.
    75. Lowermost bud scale directly above the leaf scar.
      76. Twigs densely hairy; bark white                 _Populus alba_
      76. Twigs smooth or sparsely hairy.
        77. Visible bud scales more than 4.
          78. Buds smooth, shiny, brown            _Populus tremuloides_
          78. Buds hairy, dull, gray             _Populus grandidentata_
        77. Visible bud scales 3-4.
          79. Buds at least ½ inch long              _Populus deltoides_
          79. Buds less than ½ inch long          _Populus heterophylla_
    75. Lowermost bud scale to one side of leaf scar.
      80. Buds clustered near the tip of the twig; bud scales in 5 rows.
        81. Buds at least ¼ inch long.
          82. Buds angular.
            83. Buds smooth                          _Quercus shumardii_
            83. Buds hairy, at least at tip.
              84. Buds hairy all over.
                85. Buds with rusty or brown hairs.
                  86. Buds with rusty hairs        _Quercus marilandica_
                  86. Buds with brown hairs          _Quercus michauxii_
                85. Buds with gray hairs              _Quercus velutina_
              84. Buds hairy only at the tip.
                87. Buds light red-brown          _Quercus pagodaefolia_
                87. Buds dark red-brown               _Quercus coccinea_
          82. Buds not angular.
            88. Buds and twigs orange-brown             _Quercus prinus_
            88. Buds and twigs red, red-brown, dark brown, or
                gray-brown.
              89. Buds red or red-brown.
                90. Buds light red to light red-brown    _Quercus rubra_
                90. Buds dark red to dark red-brown    _Quercus falcata_
              89. Buds dark brown                     _Quercus coccinea_
        81. Buds less than ¼ inch long.
          91. Buds pointed at the tip.
            92. Buds and twigs brown to orange-brown
                                                  _Quercus muhlenbergii_
            92. Buds and twigs red to red-brown to gray-brown.
              93. Scales of buds hairy.
                94. Twigs dark red-brown to gray; buds red-brown
                                                       _Quercus falcata_
                94. Twigs light or dark brown; buds gray-brown
                                                    _Quercus imbricaria_
              93. Scales of buds smooth or nearly so.
                95. Buds dark red-brown                _Quercus phellos_
                95. Buds light red-brown             _Quercus palustris_
          91. Buds more or less rounded.
            96. Twigs red-brown, shiny.
              97. Buds not angular                        _Quercus alba_
              97. Buds angular                   _Quercus ellipsoidalis_
            96. Twigs gray to yellow-brown to purplish, dull.
              98. Twigs and buds smooth or nearly so.
                99. Twigs purplish, with a whitish coating
                                                       _Quercus bicolor_
                99. Twigs gray to yellow-brown          _Quercus lyrata_
              98. Twigs and buds hairy.
                100. Buds red-brown                   _Quercus stellata_
                100. Buds gray to gray-brown        _Quercus macrocarpa_
      80. Buds not clustered near the tip of the twig; bud scales not in
          5 rows.
        101. Bundle scars in more than 3 groups; leaf scars lobed.
          102. Visible bud scales 2.
            103. Buds bright yellow                  _Carya cordiformis_
            103. Bud scales brown or reddish-brown.
              104. Terminal bud up to ½ inch long; twigs with orange
                  lenticels                          _Carya illinoensis_
              104. Terminal bud up to ¼ inch long; twigs with pale
                  lenticels                             _Carya aquatica_
          102. Visible bud scales more than 2.
            105. Some or all the terminal buds ½ inch long or longer.
              106. Outermost bud scales falling away early, revealing
                  pale inner scales; bark not peeling  _Carya tomentosa_
              106. Outermost bud scales persistent; bark peeling.
                107. Twigs orange-brown, with orange lenticels
                                                       _Carya laciniosa_
                107. Twigs dark brown or red-brown, with pale lenticels
                                                           _Carya ovata_
            105. Terminal buds usually less than ½ inch long.
              108. Buds rusty-hairy, with silvery or yellow scales
                                                          _Carya texana_
              108. Buds smooth or only slightly hairy, without scales.
                109. Bark smooth or furrowed, not scaly   _Carya glabra_
                109. Bark becoming scaly                  _Carya ovalis_
        101. Bundle scars in 3 groups; leaf scars not lobed.
          110. Buds up to ⅙ inch long; twigs bitter to the taste.
            111. Pith triangular in cross-section      _Alnus glutinosa_
            111. Pith not triangular in cross section.
              112. Buds very shiny                     _Prunus serotina_
              112. Buds dull                         _Prunus virginiana_
          110. Buds longer than ⅙ inch; twigs not bitter to the taste.
            113. Twigs sometimes with corky wings; buds with 4 or more
                exposed scales                 _Liquidambar styraciflua_
            113. Twigs without corky wings; buds with 2-3 exposed scales
                                                      _Castanea dentata_
  74. Pith round or nearly so in cross-section.
    114. Terminal bud present.
      115. Buds with 2-3 exposed scales            _Cornus alternifolia_
      115. Buds with 4 or more exposed scales.
        116. Bud scales fleshy                         _Crataegus spp._.
        116. Bud scales not fleshy                         _Prunus spp._
    114. Terminal bud absent.
      117. Leaf scars at least ½ inch across; bundle scars 9
                                                   _Ailanthus altissima_
      117. Leaf scars smaller; bundle scars not 9.
        118. Stipular scars absent.
          119. Leaf scars bordered by hairs          _Cercis canadensis_
          119. Leaf scars not hairy                     _Gleditsia spp._
        118. Stipular scars present.
          120. Exposed bud scales 2.
            121. Milky sap present             _Broussonetia papyrifera_
            121. Milky sap absent.
              122. Twigs gray or brown                 _Tilia americana_
              122. Twigs light red                  _Tilia heterophylla_
          120. Exposed bud scales 3 or more.
            123. Exposed bud scales 3-4; lenticels horizontal.
              124. Twigs with taste of wintergreen        _Betula lutea_
              124. Twigs without taste of wintergreen.
                125. Twigs and buds smooth; bark white
                                                     _Betula papyrifera_
                125. Twigs and buds somewhat hairy; bark reddish
                                                          _Betula nigra_
            123. Exposed bud scales more than 4; lenticels more or less
                circular.
              126. Bundle scars not in groups of 3; milky sap present.
                127. Buds about ¼ inch long                _Morus rubra_
                127. Buds about ⅛ inch long                 _Morus alba_
              126. Bundle scars in groups of 3; milky sap absent.
                128. Exposed bud scales usually about 12
                                                  _Carpinus caroliniana_
                128. Exposed bud scales usually about 6.
                  129. Leaf scars and bundle scars slightly elevated
                                                     _Ostrya virginiana_
                  129. Leaf scars and bundle scars depressed.
                    130. Buds less than ⅛ inch long       _Ulmus pumila_
                    130. Buds at least ⅛ inch long.
                      131. Some of the twigs with corky wings.
                        132. Buds about ¼ inch long     _Ulmus thomasii_
                        132. Buds about ⅛ inch long        _Ulmus alata_
                      131. None of the twigs with corky wings.
                        133. Buds rusty-hairy, about ¼ inch long
                                                           _Ulmus rubra_
                        133. Buds light brown, smooth, about ⅛ inch long
                                                       _Ulmus americana_




                           Trees of Illinois


                          SOUTHERN SUGAR MAPLE
                         _Acer barbatum_ Michx.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 60 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2
      feet; crown rounded.

Bark: Smooth and pale brown at first, becoming darker and furrowed when
      old.

Twigs: Slender, brown, smooth or hairy, usually with pale lenticels;
      leaf scars opposite, U-shaped, with 3-7 bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded, reddish-brown, hairy, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades up to 4 inches long, nearly as broad,
      palmately 3- to 5-lobed, drooping on the sides, the edges sparsely
      and coarsely toothed, green and smooth or a little hairy on the
      upper surface, paler and much hairier on the lower surface;
      leaf-stalks up to 3 inches long, very hairy. The leaves turn
      yellow or orange in the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but sometimes on the
      same tree, in dense clusters, yellowish-green, appearing as the
      leaves unfold.

Fruit: Borne in pairs, composed of a wing with a seed at the base,
      greenish, up to 1 inch long.

Wood: Heavy, strong, coarse-grained, light brown.

Uses: Furniture, interior finishing, cabinets.

Habitat: Woodlands.

Range: Virginia across southern Illinois to southeastern Oklahoma, south
      to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Southern Sugar Maple resembles the Black
      Maple because of its drooping leaves, but differs by its smaller,
      thicker leaves.

    [Illustration: SOUTHERN SUGAR MAPLE]


                               BOX ELDER
                           _Acer negundo_ L.

Other Name: Ash-leaved Maple.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 60 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 4
      feet; crown wide-spreading.

Bark: Light brown, ridged when young, becoming deeply furrowed with age.

Twigs: Smooth, green, glaucous, or rarely purplish, shiny, usually with
      white lenticels; leaf scars opposite, U-shaped, with 5-9 bundle
      traces.

Buds: Rounded, white-hairy, up to ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, pinnately compound, with 3-7 leaflets; leaflets
      elliptic to ovate, up to 4 inches long, about half as broad,
      pointed at the tip, tapering or rounded at the sometimes
      asymmetrical base, smooth or usually coarsely toothed along the
      edges or even shallowly lobed, light green and smooth on the upper
      surface, paler and smooth or hairy on the lower surface.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne on separate trees, several in a
      cluster, greenish-yellow, appearing as the leaves begin to unfold.

Fruit: Borne in pairs, in drooping clusters, composed of a curved wing
      with a seed at the base, greenish-yellow, up to 2 inches long.

Wood: Light weight, soft, close-grained, white.

Uses: Paper pulp, interior finishing, furniture.

Habitat: Moist woods.

Range: Vermont across to Saskatchewan, south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Box Elder most nearly resembles ashes, but
      differs by its green or glaucous twigs and its paired fruits.

    [Illustration: BOX ELDER]


                              BLACK MAPLE
                          _Acer nigrum_ Michx.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 65 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2½
      feet; crown broad, with several upright branches.

Bark: Dark brown to black, smooth when young, soon becoming furrowed and
      scaly.

Twigs: Slender, brown, smooth, often with pale lenticels; leaf scars
      opposite, U-shaped, with 3-7 bundle traces.

Buds: Pointed, dark brown, finely hairy, up to one-fourth inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades up to 6 inches long and nearly as
      broad, palmately 3- to 5-lobed, drooping on the sides, the edges
      of the leaves sparsely and coarsely toothed, green and smooth on
      the upper surface, yellow-green and smooth or hairy on the veins
      on the lower surface; leafstalks up to 5 inches long, smooth or
      hairy. The leaves turn yellow in the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but sometimes on the
      same tree, in dense clusters, yellowish, appearing as the leaves
      unfold.

Fruit: Borne in pairs, composed of a wing with a seed at the base,
      reddish-brown to greenish, up to 1 inch long.

Wood: Heavy, strong, coarse-grained, brown.

Uses: Furniture, cabinets.

Habitat: Rich woodlands.

Range: New Hampshire across to Minnesota and South Dakota, south to
      Louisiana, east to Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The Black Maple is distinguished from the Sugar
      Maple by its drooping leaves. It differs from the Southern Sugar
      Maple, which also has drooping leaves, by its larger, thinner
      leaves.

    [Illustration: BLACK MAPLE]


                               RED MAPLE
                            _Acer rubrum_ L.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 70 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      feet; crown oval or rounded.

Bark: Gray and smooth when young, becoming darker and scaly.

Twigs: Slender, mostly smooth, more or less reddish, usually with pale
      lenticels; leaf scars opposite, U-shaped, with 3-7 bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded, reddish, usually hairy, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades up to 6 inches long, nearly as broad,
      palmately 3- to 5-lobed, the edges of the leaves sharply toothed
      to nearly toothless, pale green and smooth on the upper surface,
      white or gray and either smooth or hairy on the lower surface;
      leafstalks smooth or finely hairy, up to 4 inches long.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but sometimes on the
      same tree, in dense clusters, bright red or yellow, opening in
      February and March before the leaves begin to unfold.

Fruit: Borne in pairs, composed of an erect wing with a seed at the
      base, red or yellow, up to 1 inch long.

Wood: Heavy, close-grained, light brown.

Uses: Furniture, gun-stocks.

Habitat: Swamps, low woods, upland slopes, bluff tops.

Range: Newfoundland across to Ontario, south to eastern Texas, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Red Maple is characterized by its white
      lower leaf surfaces and its shallowly lobed leaves. The similar
      Silver Maple has very deeply lobed leaves.

    [Illustration: RED MAPLE]


                            SWAMP RED MAPLE
             _ rubrum_ L. var. _drummondii_ (H. & A.) Sarg.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 40 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1
      foot; crown narrow.

Bark: Gray and smooth when young, becoming darker and scaly.

Twigs: Slender, white-hairy when young, usually becoming smooth or
      nearly so, reddish; leaf scars opposite, U-shaped, with 3-7 bundle
      traces.

Buds: Rounded, reddish, hairy, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades up to 6 inches long, nearly as broad,
      palmately 3- to 5-lobed, the edges of the leaves toothed, green
      and somewhat hairy on the upper surface, densely white-hairy on
      the lower surface; leafstalks stout, densely hairy, up to 4 inches
      long.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but sometimes on the
      same tree, in dense red clusters, opening before the leaves begin
      to unfold.

Fruit: Borne in pairs, composed of an erect wing with a seed at the
      base, bright red, over 1 inch long.

Wood: Heavy, coarse-grained, light brown.

Use: Furniture.

Habitat: Wooded swamps.

Range: New Jersey across to Missouri, south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Swamp Red Maple is distinguished from the
      Red Maple by the dense coat of white hairs on the undersurface of
      the leaves and by the longer fruits.

    [Illustration: SWAMP RED MAPLE]


                              SILVER MAPLE
                         _Acer saccharinum_ L.

Other Name: Soft Maple.

Growth Form: Medium to large tree up to 100 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to 5 feet; crown usually broadly rounded.

Bark: Gray or silvery, smooth at first, becoming loose and scaly or even
      somewhat shaggy when old.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown, smooth, often curving upward; leaf scars
      opposite, U-shaped, with 3-7 bundle traces.

Buds: More or less rounded, reddish-brown, smooth to finely hairy, up to
      ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades up to 8 inches long, nearly as broad,
      deeply palmately 5-lobed, the edges of the leaves sharply toothed,
      pale green and smooth on the upper surface, silvery-white and
      usually smooth on the lower surface, except in the leaf axils;
      leafstalks smooth, up to 5 inches long, often reddish.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but sometimes on the
      same tree, in dense clusters, greenish-yellow, opening in February
      and March before the leaves begin to unfold.

Fruit: Borne in pairs, composed of a curved wing with a seed at the
      base, green or yellow, up to 3 inches long.

Wood: Hard, close-grained, pale brown.

Uses: Furniture; sometimes grown as an ornamental, but the branchlets
      are brittle.

Habitat: Wet soil.

Range: New Brunswick across to Minnesota and South Dakota, south to
      Oklahoma, Texas, east to northern Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The deeply lobed leaves which are silvery-white
      on the flower surface best distinguish this tree.

    [Illustration: SILVER MAPLE]


                              SUGAR MAPLE
                        _Acer saccharum_ Marsh.

Other Name: Hard Maple.

Growth Form: Medium to large tree up to 80 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to 3 feet; crown broadly rounded, with many branches.

Bark: Gray to dark brown to black, becoming furrowed and scaly.

Twigs: Slender, smooth, brown, often with pale lenticels; leaf scars
      opposite, U-shaped, with 3-7 bundle traces.

Buds: Pointed, dark brown, smooth or a little hairy, shiny, up to ¼ inch
      long.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades up to 5 inches long, nearly as broad or
      a little broader, palmately 3- to 5-lobed, the edges of the leaves
      sparsely and coarsely toothed, dark green and smooth on the upper
      surface, green or paler on the lower surface and usually smooth,
      or sometimes hairy on the veins; leafstalks up to 3 inches long,
      smooth and sometimes hairy. The leaves turn brilliant shades of
      yellow and orange in the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but sometimes on the
      same tree, in dense clusters, greenish-yellow, appearing as the
      leaves begin to unfold.

Fruit: Borne in pairs, composed of a wing with a seed at the base,
      greenish-yellow to brownish, up to 1 inch long.

Wood: Heavy, strong, close-grained, light brown.

Uses: Furniture, interior finishing, cabinets; maple sugar is derived
      from the sap; frequently grown as an ornamental.

Habitat: Moist woods.

Range: Newfoundland across to Manitoba, south to eastern Texas, east to
      northern Florida.

_Distinguishing_ Features: Leaves of the Sugar Maple differ from those
      of the Black Maple and the Southern Sugar Maple by being flat,
      rather than drooping along the edges. {Sap differs from the Norway
      Maple, _Acer platanoides_, by being clear rather than milky.}

    [Illustration: SUGAR MAPLE]


                              RED BUCKEYE
                       _Aesculus discolor_ Pursh

Growth Form: Small tree to 25 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 10 inches;
      crown rounded and spreading.

Bark: Gray to tan, smooth.

Twigs: Rather stout, gray to tan, smooth; leaf scars opposite,
      triangular, with 3 groups of bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, reddish-brown, up to ½ inch long, not hairy, not
      sticky.

Leaves: Opposite, palmately compound, with 5 leaflets; leaflets elliptic
      to obovate, pointed at the tip, tapering to the base, up to 6
      inches long, less than half as wide, toothed along the edges,
      green and smooth on the upper surface, paler and finely hairy on
      the lower surface.

Flowers: Numerous, red, in large clusters sometimes nearly 1 foot long,
      appearing in April.

Fruit: Spherical or punching-bag shaped, up to 2 inches across, light
      brown, not prickly, containing 1 or 2 light reddish-brown seeds.

Wood: Soft, close-grained, light in weight, pale brown.

Use: Sometimes grown as an ornamental because of its showy flowers.

Habitat: Rich woods.

Range: North Carolina across to Missouri, south to Texas, east to
      Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The smooth fruits and the beautiful red flowers
      distinguish this species from other members of the genus in
      Illinois.

    [Illustration: RED BUCKEYE]


                              OHIO BUCKEYE
                        _Aesculus glabra_ Willd.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 55 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 15
      inches; crown broadly rounded.

Bark: Gray to pale gray, deeply furrowed and roughened when mature.

Twigs: Stout, pale brown, smooth; leaf scars opposite, triangular, with
      3 groups of bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, reddish-brown to yellowish, up to ⅔ inch long, not
      hairy, not sticky.

Leaves: Opposite, palmately compound, with 5 or 7 leaflets; leaflets
      obovate to oblanceolate, long-pointed at the tip, tapering to the
      base, up to 6 inches long, less than half as wide, toothed along
      the edges, green and smooth on the upper surface, green or much
      whitened on the lower surface.

Flowers: Numerous, yellow-green, in large clusters sometimes nearly 1
      foot long, appearing in April and May, the petals of each flower
      of different lengths.

Fruit: Prickly, spherical or nearly so, up to 1½ inch in diameter, pale
      brown, containing 1 large, smooth and shiny seed.

Wood: Soft, close-grained, light in weight, pale brown to nearly white.

Uses: Paper pulp. The tree is also sometimes grown as an ornamental.

Habitat: Usually rich woods.

Range: Pennsylvania across to Nebraska, south to Oklahoma, east to
      Alabama.

_Distinguishing_ Features: The Ohio Buckeye differs from the Horse
      Chestnut {_Aesculus hippocastanum_} by its non-sticky buds. It
      differs from the Red Buckeye by the greenish-yellow flowers and
      prickly fruits.

    [Illustration: OHIO BUCKEYE]


                             TREE-OF-HEAVEN
                 _Ailanthus altissima_ (Mill.) Swingle

Growth Form: Medium to large tree to 75 feet tall; trunk diameter up to
      2 feet; crown spreading and irregular. The tree readily spreads by
      underground root-suckers.

Bark: Smooth or slightly roughened, light brown to dark brown.

Twigs: Stout, angular, smooth, gray to light brown, with lenticels; leaf
      scars alternate, large, broadly heart-shaped, slightly elevated,
      with usually 9 bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded, up to ⅛ inch in diameter, smooth or a little hairy,
      brown.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with up to 41 leaflets; leaflets
      lanceolate, tapering to a long point at the tip, rounded at the
      base, up to 6 inches long, less than half as wide, smooth or
      somewhat hairy on both surfaces, often with some teeth along the
      edges. The leaves have an unpleasant odor when crushed.

Flowers: Some flowers with both stamens and pistils, others with one or
      the other, in large green or yellow clusters, each flower small,
      with 5 petals. The staminate flowers produce a very unpleasant
      odor. The flowers appear in June and July.

Fruit: Large clusters of winged seeds, yellow or orange, each fruit up
      to 2 inches long with one seed about in the middle.

Use: Tree-of-Heaven is grown as an ornamental, principally in urban
      areas where it is able to withstand considerable smoke and smog.

Habitat: Disturbed woods; readily adapts to urban conditions.

Range: Native of Asia; frequently planted in the United States and
      readily spreading from cultivation.

Distinguishing Features: The pinnately compound leaves with up to 41
      leaflets, unpleasantly scented when crushed, make this a readily
      recognizable species.

    [Illustration: TREE-OF-HEAVEN]


                              BLACK ALDER
                     _Alnus glutinosa_ (L.) Gaertn.

Growth Form: Small or medium tree to 45 feet tall; trunk diameter up to
      12 inches; crown broadly rounded when mature.

Bark: Smooth at first, becoming shallowly fissured with age.

Twigs: Slender, gray or gray-brown, smooth; leaf scars alternate, with 3
      bundle traces.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades nearly round or obovate, rounded at
      the tip, rounded or somewhat tapering to the base, up to five
      inches long, often nearly as broad, irregularly and rather
      coarsely toothed along the edges, dark green and smooth on the
      upper surface, green and smooth beneath, or sometimes hairy on the
      veins; leafstalks stout, up to 1 inch long, usually smooth.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne separately but on the
      same tree, appearing before the leaves unfold, the staminate in
      slender, drooping catkins up to 3 inches long, the pistillate in
      erect, oblong “cones” less than 1 inch long.

Fruit: Cone-shaped, up to ¾ inch long, composed of several nut-like
      seeds, each subtended by a woody segment of the “cone.”

Wood: Soft, straight-grained.

Uses: The wood is easily carved and used in the making of small wooden
      objects. It is also used for charcoal and fuel. The bark has
      reputed medicinal properties.

Habitat: Moist, disturbed areas.

Range: Native of Europe, Asia, and Africa; naturalized throughout much
      of northeastern North America.

Distinguishing Features: The small, woody “cones” and the often
      orbicular, irregularly toothed leaves are the distinguishing marks
      of this species.

    [Illustration: BLACK ALDER]


                                SHADBUSH
                _Amelanchier arborea_ (Michx. f.) Fern.

Other Names: Shadblow; Serviceberry.

Growth Form: Small tree up to 20 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 8
      inches; crown rounded and spreading with many slender branchlets;
      trunk straight, slender, often divided into several trunks.

Bark: Smooth and silvery at first, later becoming darker and divided
      into loose scales.

Twigs: Slender, brown, with a few hairs when very young; leaf scars
      alternate, 2-ranked, slightly elevated, narrowly crescent-shaped,
      with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Pointed, slender, brown, up to ½ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades oval to broadly lanceolate, pointed at
      the tip, rounded or sometimes a little heart-shaped at the base,
      finely toothed along the edges, green and smooth or nearly so on
      the upper surface, paler and often hairy on the lower surface, up
      to 4 inches long and about half as broad; leafstalks up to 2
      inches long, smooth or hairy.

Flowers: Several produced in drooping clusters before the leaves appear,
      each showy with 5 white, oblong petals, with much of the flower
      hairy.

Fruit: Mostly spherical, up to ¼ inch in diameter, reddish-purple,
      capped by the persistent calyx, dry, 1- to 2-seeded.

Wood: Rather heavy, hard, close-grained, reddish-brown.

Uses: Fuel, tool handles; the fruit is edible.

Habitat: Wooded slopes; edge of cliffs.

Range: Quebec across to Minnesota, south to Nebraska, east to Louisiana
      and Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Shadbush is recognized by its alternate,
      simple leaves which are usually heart-shaped at the base, and by
      its distinctive white flowers.

    [Illustration: SHADBUSH]


                            SMOOTH SHADBUSH
                       _Amelanchier laevis_ Wieg.

Other Name: Smooth Serviceberry.

Growth Form: Small tree up to 15 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 6
      inches; crown narrowly round-topped, with many slender branchlets.

Bark: Smooth and gray at first, becoming darker and scaly at maturity.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown or grayish, smooth; leaf scars alternate,
      slightly elevated, narrowly crescent-shaped, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Slender, pointed, reddish-brown, smooth, up to ¾ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades elliptic to ovate, pointed at the tip,
      usually rounded at the base, up to 3 inches long, about ½ as
      broad, finely toothed along the edges, green and smooth on the
      upper surface, paler and smooth on the lower surface; leafstalks
      slender, up to 1 inch long, smooth.

Flowers: Up to 6 in drooping clusters, appearing after the leaves are
      half grown, each showy with 5 white, narrow petals, with most of
      the flower smooth.

Fruit: Usually spherical, up to ¼ inch in diameter, dark purple, sweet,
      fleshy, 1- to 2-seeded.

Wood: Hard, heavy, close-grained, dark brown.

Uses: Fuel, tool handles; the fruits are edible.

Habitat: Moist woods and slopes.

Range: Newfoundland across to Ontario, south to Iowa, Illinois, and
      Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The Smooth Shadbush differs from the Shadbush
      by its smooth leafstalks and juicy, edible, dark purple fruits.

    [Illustration: SMOOTH SHADBUSH]


                             HERCULES’ CLUB
                          _Aralia spinosa_ L.

Other Name: Devil’s Walking-stick.

Growth Form: Small tree to 30 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 6 inches;
      crown widely spreading.

Bark: Dark brown, roughened, shallowly furrowed, with short, hard
      prickles.

Twigs: Stout, pale brown or gray, smooth except for many short, hard
      prickles; leaf scars alternate, broadly U-shaped, with about 15
      bundle traces.

Buds: Cone-shaped, brown, smooth, up to ½ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, doubly or triply pinnately compound, with very
      numerous leaflets; leaflets ovate to lance-ovate, pointed at the
      tip, tapering to rounded at the base, up to 3 inches long, about
      half as wide, coarsely toothed along the edges, green and smooth
      on the upper surface, paler and smooth on the lower surface,
      except usually for a few prickles along the veins.

Flowers: Numerous, in many umbrella-shaped clusters, appearing during
      late June and July, each with 5 small white petals and purple
      stalks.

Fruit: Black, spherical berries up to ⅛ inch in diameter, containing 2-5
      seeds.

Wood: Light in weight, soft, brittle, close-grained, pale brown.

Use: Hercules’ Club is sometimes grown as an ornamental.

Habitat: Rich woods.

Range: New Jersey across to Iowa, south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The clusters of flowers and the leaves each may
      be as much as 4 feet long. The short, sharp prickles of the twigs
      are distinctive.

    [Illustration: HERCULES’ CLUB]


                                 PAWPAW
                        _Asimina triloba_ Dunal.

Growth Form: Small tree rarely up to 40 feet tall; trunk diameter up to
      10 inches; crown broad and spreading; trunk straight, slender;
      thickets develop by means of root suckers.

Bark: Dark brown, thin, smooth at first, becoming shallowly fissured
      with age.

Twigs: Slender, smooth, gray; leaf scars alternate, 2-ranked, more or
      less horseshoe-shaped, usually with 5 or less commonly 7 bundle
      traces.

Buds: Very narrow, dark rusty-brown, covered with golden hairs, up to ⅔
      inch long, without bud scales.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades broadly lance-shaped to elliptic,
      short-pointed at the tip, narrowed to the base, without teeth
      along the edges, smooth on both surfaces, paler on the lower
      surface, up to 1 foot long and 6 inches broad; leafstalks short,
      slender, smooth.

Flowers: Borne singly when the leaves begin to unfold, up to 2 inches
      across, green at first, becoming deep maroon, composed of three
      wrinkled, leathery sepals and six similar petals.

Fruit: Oblong, thick, up to 6 inches long, greenish-yellow, with yellow
      edible flesh and several dark brown seeds, ripening in September.

Wood: Soft, coarse-grained, light in weight, greenish-yellow.

Use: The fruit is used as a source of food; the wood has few uses.

Habitat: Woods and thickets, often many growing together in a colony.

Range: New York across to Michigan and Iowa, south to Texas, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Pawpaw is distinguished by its large,
      toothless, alternate leaves, its slender buds without bud scales,
      and its thick, fleshy fruits.

    [Illustration: PAWPAW]


                              YELLOW BIRCH
                         _Betula lutea_ Michx.

Other Name: Gray Birch.

Growth Form: Moderate tree up to 50 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1½
      feet; crown broadly rounded, with small branches.

Bark: Smooth and silvery or grayish, curling into strips, very rough
      when old.

Twigs: Slender, greenish-brown, smooth, with numerous lenticels; leaf
      scars alternate, half-elliptical, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Pointed, brown, usually somewhat hairy, up to ⅙ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades ovate, pointed at the tip, more or
      less rounded at the somewhat asymmetrical base, up to 5 inches
      long, and nearly half as wide, double-toothed, dark green and
      nearly smooth on the upper surface, paler and usually somewhat
      hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks yellow, hairy, up to one
      inch long. The leaves turn yellow in the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne separately but on the
      same tree, the staminate crowded in elongated clusters, the
      pistillate crowded in shorter, thicker clusters, appearing after
      the leaves have begun to unfold.

Fruit: Several winged nuts, crowded together in erect “cones” up to 1½
      inches long.

Wood: Heavy, hard, strong, pale brown.

Uses: Furniture, flooring, boxes.

Habitat: Wooded slopes.

Range: Newfoundland across to Manitoba, south to Iowa, northern
      Illinois, northern Indiana, Ohio, and Delaware; also in the
      Appalachian Mountains to Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The Yellow Birch differs from all other birches
      in Illinois by its silvery or grayish bark and its ovate leaves.
      The bark has the faint fragrance of wintergreen.

    [Illustration: YELLOW BIRCH]


                              RIVER BIRCH
                           _Betula nigra_ L.

Other Name: Red Birch.

Growth Form: Up to 75 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2 feet; crown
      irregularly rounded.

Bark: Curling, shredding, brownish-pink to reddish-brown.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown, with several short hairs; leaf scars
      alternate, half-elliptical, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Up to one-fourth inch long, pointed, hairy.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades rhombic to ovate, coarsely doubly
      toothed, paler and densely hairy on the lower surface, up to 3
      inches long, acute at the tip, truncate or tapering to the base,
      the leafstalks woolly.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate on same tree, inconspicuous, opening
      in late April and May, the staminate in slender drooping clusters,
      the pistillate in short, conelike, woolly clusters.

Fruit: Tiny, hairy nuts, each with a 3-lobed wing, crowded together in a
      cylindrical cone up to 1½ inches long and ½ inch thick.

Wood: Strong but light, pale brown.

Uses: Wood is used for furniture; sometimes planted as an ornamental.

Habitat: Along rivers and streams; bottomland woods.

Range: Massachusetts and New Hampshire across to southern Minnesota and
      eastern Kansas, south to eastern Texas and Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The shaggy, peeling reddish-brown bark readily
      distinguishes this tree from any other in Illinois, as does its
      rhombic, doubly toothed leaves.

    [Illustration: RIVER BIRCH]


                              PAPER BIRCH
                       _Betula papyrifera_ Marsh.

Other Name: Canoe Birch.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 70 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2
      feet; crown broadly rounded, irregular, with many slender
      branches.

Bark: Thin and white or creamy, splitting at maturity into papery
      layers, becoming very dark and furrowed near the base of the trunk
      at maturity.

Twigs: Slender, zigzag, reddish-brown to blackish, more or less hairy;
      leaf scars alternate, half-elliptical, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Slender, pointed, dark brown, smooth or nearly so, up to
      one-fourth inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades ovate, pointed at the tip, more or
      less rounded at the base, up to 3 inches long, over half as wide,
      coarsely toothed, dark green and smooth on the upper surface,
      yellow-green and smooth or somewhat hairy on the lower surface and
      with black dots on the lower surface; leafstalks yellow, smooth or
      finely hairy, up to 1 inch long. The leaves turn yellow in the
      autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately on the same tree,
      developing in the autumn and present on the tree during the
      winter, the staminate crowded into slender spikes up to 4 inches
      long, the pistillate crowded into thicker spikes up to 1¼ inches
      long, the flowers minute, without petals.

Fruit: Cone-like, cylindrical, drooping, composed of many minute seeds
      attached to 3-lobed wings.

Wood: Light in weight, hard, strong, durable, close-grained, light
      reddish-brown.

Uses: Bark used to cover canoes; wood used for pulp, fuel, toothpicks,
      and spools; sometimes grown as an ornamental.

Habitat: Rich, wooded slopes and stream banks.

Range: Labrador across to Alaska, south to Montana, Colorado, northern
      Illinois, and West Virginia.

Distinguishing Features: The Paper Birch is readily distinguished by its
      white bark which peels off into thin, papery layers.

    [Illustration: PAPER BIRCH]


                             PAPER MULBERRY
                  _Broussonetia papyrifera_ (L.) Vent.

Growth Form: Small tree to 20 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 8 inches;
      crown rounded.

Bark: Gray or light brown, smooth.

Twigs: Moderately stout, greenish-gray, smooth or finely hairy, zigzag;
      leaf scars alternate, nearly spherical, elevated, with 5 bundle
      traces.

Buds: Cone-shaped, more or less smooth, up to 3 mm long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades ovate, tapering to a point at the tip,
      more or less heart-shaped at the base, up to 8 inches long,
      sometimes nearly as broad, toothed, sometimes 2- or 3-lobed,
      usually rough-hairy on both surfaces; leafstalks up to 2 inches
      long, smooth or finely hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne separately, on separate
      trees, appearing as the leaves unfold, the staminate in pendulous
      catkins, the pistillate in dense, hairy, spherical heads.

Fruit: Spherical, semi-fleshy, orange, up to 1 inch in diameter, with
      red fruits projecting.

Use: Often planted as an ornamental.

Habitat: Along roads, around old homes.

Range: Native of Asia; occasionally found along roads and in fencerows
      in the eastern United States.

Distinguishing Features: The leaves, some of which are 2- or 3-lobed,
      are very reminiscent of mulberry leaves. Mulberry leaves, however,
      are not densely rough-hairy.

    [Illustration: PAPER MULBERRY]


                               BLUE BEECH
                      _Carpinus caroliniana_ Walt.

Other Names: Ironwood; American Hornbeam; Musclewood.

Growth Form: Up to 30 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1½ feet; crown
      rounded.

Bark: Smooth, blue-gray, ridged, appearing “muscular.”

Twigs: Slender, difficult to break, reddish-brown, smooth or finely
      hairy; leaf scars alternate, crescent-shaped, elevated, with 3
      bundle traces.

Buds: Small, angular, tapering to a short point.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades thin, pointed at the tip, usually
      rounded at the base, 2-4 inches long and about half as wide,
      finely doubly toothed, the upper surface smooth, the lower surface
      either smooth or hairy; leafstalks up to ½ inch long, hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate on same tree but in different catkins,
      opening during May.

Fruit: Nutlets borne at the base of a three-lobed green “leaf,” crowded
      together into a fruiting cluster.

Wood: Strong and hard, hence the name Ironwood.

Use: Tool handles.

Habitat: Moist woods.

Range: Nova Scotia across to central Minnesota, south to eastern
      Oklahoma and eastern Texas, east to central Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Several other trees may be confused with the
      Blue Beech. Beech, which has smooth gray bark, has leaves with
      fewer teeth and twigs with pointed buds. Hop Hornbeam, with very
      similar leaves, has a flaky bark. The elms, which also have
      somewhat similar leaves, usually have the leaves asymmetrical at
      the base.

    [Illustration: BLUE BEECH]


                             WATER HICKORY
                   _Carya aquatica_ (Michx. f.) Nutt.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 75 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2 feet;
      crown narrow.

Bark: Reddish-brown, furrowed, becoming somewhat scaly at maturity.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown or gray, smooth or occasionally slightly
      hairy; leaf scars alternate, 3-lobed, scarcely elevated, with
      several bundle traces.

Buds: Pointed, reddish-brown with yellow scales, usually hairy, up to ¼
      inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with 7-17 leaflets; leaflets
      lance-shaped, curved, pointed at the tip, tapering to the
      asymmetrical base, up to 5 inches long, up to 2 inches wide,
      finely toothed along the edges, dark green and smooth or nearly so
      on the upper surface, brownish and smooth or somewhat hairy on the
      lower surface.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing when the leaves are partly grown, the staminate
      several in slender, drooping catkins up to 3 inches long, the
      pistillate fewer, in shorter spikes, neither type with petals.

Fruit: Short-ellipsoid, usually tapering to either end, flattened, up to
      1½ inches long and two-thirds as broad, the husk 4-winged, dark
      brown but with yellow scales, thin, splitting only about halfway
      to the base, the nut flattened, 4-angled, reddish-brown, the shell
      thin, the seed bitter.

Wood: Heavy, hard, strong, close-grained, dark brown.

Uses: Fence posts, fuel.

Habitat: Swampy woods and drained floodplains.

Range: Virginia across to southeastern Missouri, south to Texas, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Water Hickory is similar to Pecan and Bitternut
      Hickory in having 7 or more leaflets per leaf. However, it lacks
      the yellow buds of the Bitternut Hickory and the slender, edible
      nut of the Pecan. The leaves are generally hairier than those of
      the Pecan.

    [Illustration: WATER HICKORY]


                           BITTERNUT HICKORY
                  _Carya cordiformis_ (Wang.) K. Koch

Other Name: Yellow-bud Hickory.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 75 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2½
      feet; crown broadly rounded and often irregular; trunk straight,
      columnar.

Bark: Brown, thin, separating into small, platy scales or shallow ridges
      and fissures.

Twigs: Slender, grayish or orange-brown, smooth, usually with lenticels;
      leaf scars alternate, shield-shaped, scarcely elevated, with
      usually several bundle traces.

Buds: Narrow, slender, pointed, covered by a dense, bright yellow coat
      of glandular dots and small hairs, up to ¾ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with usually 7-9 leaflets;
      leaflets lance-shaped, usually curved, long-pointed at the tip,
      tapering or rounded at the base, toothed along the edges,
      yellow-green and smooth on the upper surface, somewhat lighter and
      usually hairy on the lower surface, up to 6 inches long and
      usually less than half as wide.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing after the leaves have begun to unfold, minute,
      without petals, the staminate in slender, drooping catkins, the
      pistillate in groups of 1 or 2.

Fruit: More or less spherical, up to 1¼ inches in diameter, the husk
      thin, yellowish, with 4 distinct ridges extending about halfway
      down, the nut somewhat flattened, the seed very bitter.

Wood: Heavy, hard, strong, dark brown.

Uses: Fuel, fence posts.

Habitat: Bottomland woods; dry hills; along roads.

Range: Southern Ontario across to central Minnesota, south to eastern
      Texas, east to north-central Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Bitternut Hickory is easily recognized by its
      slender, mustard-yellow buds. It differs further from the Water
      Hickory by its rounded fruits.

    [Illustration: BITTERNUT HICKORY]


                             PIGNUT HICKORY
                      _Carya glabra_ (Mill.) Sweet

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 75 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2
      feet; crown oblong or obovoid, with many small, spreading
      branchlets; trunk straight, columnar, sometimes branching fairly
      low to the ground.

Bark: Light gray to black, not scaly or peeling off into shreds, at
      maturity furrowed and ridged.

Twigs: Slender, brown or gray, shiny, smooth, tough, usually with
      lenticels; leaf scars alternate, shield-shaped or 3-lobed,
      scarcely elevated, usually with several bundle traces.

Buds: More or less rounded but coming to a short point at the tip, tan
      or grayish, the outermost scales tipped with a few small hairs,
      never with small yellow dots, the inner scales hairy all along the
      edges, up to ½ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with usually 5, sometimes 7
      leaflets; leaflets lance-shaped, pointed at the tip, tapering at
      the bottom, toothed along the edges, green and smooth on the upper
      surface, green and smooth or sometimes hairy on the veins on the
      lower surface, up to 5 inches long and up to 2 inches broad, the
      upper three leaflets larger than the lower two.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing after the leaves have begun to expand, minute,
      without petals, the staminate in slender, drooping catkins, the
      pistillate in groups of 1-3.

Fruit: Spherical to pear-shaped, up to 1 inch long, not quite as broad,
      the husks thin, greenish, usually not splitting all the way to the
      base, the nut somewhat compressed and with a very hard shell, the
      seed sweet. Occasional trees have fruits up to 2 inches long.

Wood: Heavy, strong, hard, brown.

Uses: Fuel, fence posts, tool handles.

Habitat: Wooded slopes and ridges.

Range: Vermont across to southern Michigan and northern Illinois, south
      across Missouri to eastern Texas, east to central Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Pignut Hickory is best recognized by its rather
      small leaflets which usually are five in number, the tight bark,
      and the characteristic pear-shaped fruits.

    [Illustration: PIGNUT HICKORY]


                                 PECAN
                  _Carya illinoensis_ (Wang.) K. Koch

Growth Form: Large tree up to 150 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      feet; crown widely spreading and rounded; trunk rather short,
      stout, straight.

Bark: Reddish-brown, becoming roughened into platy scales.

Twigs: Rather stout, brown, hairy when young, but becoming smooth; leaf
      scars alternate, 3-lobed, scarcely elevated, with 3-18 bundle
      traces.

Buds: Long-pointed, covered with yellow glandular dots and fine hairs,
      up to one-half inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with 9-19 leaflets; leaflets
      lance-shaped, curved, long-pointed at the tip, rounded or tapering
      to the asymmetrical base, finely doubly-toothed, yellow-green and
      usually smooth on the upper surface, paler and either smooth or
      hairy on the lower surface, up to 8 inches long and 3 inches
      broad.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing when the leaves are partly grown, the staminate
      many in slender, drooping, yellow-green catkins, the pistillate
      fewer in shorter spikes, neither type with petals.

Fruit: Ellipsoid, pointed at the tip, up to 2 inches long and 1 inch
      broad, the husk narrowly 4-winged, dark brown but with yellow
      scales, thin, usually splitting nearly to the base, the nut
      pointed at the tip, reddish-brown with black markings, the shell
      thin, the seed sweet.

Wood: Hard, heavy, coarse-grained, light reddish-brown.

Uses: The nuts are prized for their tastiness; the wood is used for
      interior finishing, furniture, fuel, and tool handles.

Habitat: Moist woods, particularly along rivers.

Range: Indiana to Iowa, south through southeastern Kansas to eastern
      Texas, east to Alabama; Mexico.

Distinguishing Features: The Pecan differs from all other hickories by
      its greater number of leaflets. The Black Walnut and Butternut,
      which may have as many leaflets, have a partitioned pith. In every
      case, the fruit of the Pecan is distinctive.

    [Illustration: PECAN]


                            KINGNUT HICKORY
                  _Carya laciniosa_ (Michx. f.) Loud.

Other Names: Big Shellbark Hickory; Riverbank Hickory.

Growth Form: Large tree up to 100 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      feet; crown oblong to ovoid, with drooping lower branches; trunk
      straight, columnar, stout.

Bark: Light gray, soon separating into long, thick, vertical plates
      which curve away from the trunk.

Twigs: Stout, gray or brown, conspicuously dotted with orange lenticels;
      leaf scars alternate, shield-shaped or 3-lobed, not elevated,
      usually with several bundle traces.

Buds: Elongated, dark brown, hairy, up to ¾ inch long, the outer scales
      with a long, stiff point.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with 5-9 leaflets; leaflets
      lance-shaped to ovate, pointed at the tip, tapering or rounded at
      the base, finely toothed along the edges, dark green and mostly
      smooth on the upper surface, paler and softly hairy on the lower
      surface, up to 10 inches long and up to half as wide.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing after the leaves have begun to unfold, minute,
      without petals, the staminate in slender, drooping catkins, the
      pistillate in clusters of 2-5.

Fruit: Spherical, often depressed at the top, up to 2¼ inches across,
      the husk divided all the way to the base into four sections,
      minutely orange-speckled and sometimes hairy, the nut with
      conspicuous ridges, the seed very sweet.

Wood: Heavy, hard, close-grained, dark brown.

Uses: Wood is used for tool handles and fuel; nuts are sold commercially
      because of their edible qualities.

Habitat: Rich bottomlands.

Range: Southwestern Pennsylvania and southern Michigan across to central
      Illinois and southern Iowa, south to northeastern Oklahoma,
      Arkansas, and eastern Tennessee; also in scattered areas of New
      York, Virginia, North Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi.

Distinguishing Features: The shaggy bark and large leaflets resemble
      those of the Shagbark Hickory, but the Kingnut Hickory has
      orange-dotted twigs and usually seven leaflets which lack minute
      tufts of hairs at the tip of each tooth.

    [Illustration: KINGNUT HICKORY]


                          SWEET PIGNUT HICKORY
                      _Carya ovalis_ (Wang.) Sarg.

Other Names: False Shagbark Hickory; Small-fruited Hickory.

Growth Form: Medium to large tree up to 80 feet tall; trunk up to 2 feet
      in diameter; crown oblong or broadly rounded, with upright,
      spreading upper branches and drooping lower branches; trunk
      straight, columnar.

Bark: Gray, tight and rather smooth when young, usually peeling off into
      narrow plates at maturity.

Twigs: Slender, brown or gray, tough, smooth, usually with lenticels;
      leaf scars alternate, 3-lobed, not elevated, usually with several
      bundle traces.

Buds: More or less rounded but coming to a short point at the tip, tan
      or grayish, usually minutely yellow-dotted, the scales hairy all
      along the edges up to ⅔ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with usually 7, sometimes 5,
      leaflets; leaflets lance-shaped sometimes curved, pointed at the
      tip, tapering or somewhat rounded at the base, finely toothed
      along the edges, green and smooth on the upper surface, minutely
      dotted and sometimes with some hairs on the lower surface, up to 6
      inches long, up to 2 inches broad.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, after the leaves have begun to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate crowded in slender, drooping catkins, the
      pistillate in groups of 1-2.

Fruit: Ellipsoid, rarely spherical, up to 1¼ inch long, the husk green
      and minutely warty, thin, splitting all the way to the base, the
      nut somewhat 4-angled, the seed sweet.

Wood: Heavy, hard, brown.

Uses: Tool handles, fuel.

Habitat: Wooded slopes.

Range: New Hampshire across to Wisconsin, south to Arkansas, east to
      Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: This Hickory cannot always be reliably
      distinguished from the Pignut Hickory. However, it usually has a
      somewhat scaly bark, seven leaflets, minutely yellow-dotted buds,
      and fruits which split all the way to the base.

    [Illustration: SWEET PIGNUT HICKORY]


                            SHAGBARK HICKORY
                     _Carya ovata_ (Mill.) K. Koch

Growth Form: Medium to large tree up to 80 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to 3½ feet; crown rounded, with some of the branches often
      hanging.

Bark: Gray, separating into long, shreddy scales giving the trunk a
      shaggy appearance.

Twigs: Stout, reddish-brown to gray, smooth or somewhat hairy; leaf
      scars alternate, 3-lobed, not elevated, with several bundle
      traces.

Buds: Ovoid, rounded or short-pointed at the tip, up to 1 inch long,
      hairy, the scales conspicuously yellow-green or reddish as they
      unfold in the spring.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with 5-7 leaflets; leaflets
      ovate, obovate, or less commonly lance-shaped, usually
      short-pointed at the tip, tapering to the base, up to 10 inches
      long, up to 5 inches wide, finely toothed along the edges, with
      the tip of each tooth with a minute tuft of hairs, green or
      yellow-green and smooth on the upper surface, paler and smooth or
      somewhat hairy on the lower surface.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing after the leaves have begun to unfold, minute,
      without petals, the staminate crowded in slender, drooping
      catkins, the pistillate in groups of 2-5.

Fruit: Spherical or occasionally punching-bag shaped, up to 2 inches
      across, the husk yellow-green to reddish-brown, up to ½ inch
      thick, splitting all the way to the base, the nut 4-angled, nearly
      white, the seed sweet.

Wood: Heavy, hard, light brown, close-grained.

Uses: Tool handles, fuel; the nuts are tasty.

Habitat: Low, shaded woods.

Range: Maine across to Minnesota, south to eastern Texas, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Shagbark Hickory is distinguished by its
      shaggy bark, its usually 5 large leaflets, and its large winter
      buds.

    [Illustration: SHAGBARK HICKORY]


                             BLACK HICKORY
                         _Carya texana_ Buckl.

Other Names: Red Hickory; Texas Hickory; Buckley’s Hickory.

Growth Form: Small tree up to 25 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1 foot;
      crown oblong to rounded, with numerous, small branchlets; trunk
      straight or somewhat crooked, slender but sturdy.

Bark: Brown to black, not scaly or peeling off into shreds, becoming
      somewhat furrowed and ridged at maturity.

Twigs: Slender, gray, tough, almost always smooth; leaf scars alternate,
      three-lobed, not elevated, usually with several bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, short-pointed, up to ½ inch long, covered by shiny
      silvery-golden scales and tipped with a small tuft of hairs.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with 5-7 leaflets; leaflets
      lance-shaped, pointed at the tip, tapering to the base, finely
      toothed along the edges, dark green and smooth or sometimes hairy
      on the upper surface, paler and smooth or hairy on the lower
      surface, up to 6 inches long, less than half as wide, the stalks
      covered with reddish and yellowish scales and hairs.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing after the leaves have begun to unfold, minute,
      without petals, the staminate crowded in slender, drooping
      catkins, the pistillate in groups of 1-2.

Fruit: Spherical to ellipsoid, up to 1½ inches across, the husk
      yellow-green, thin, minutely hairy or scaly, splitting nearly to
      the base, the nut 4-angled, the seed sweet.

Wood: Heavy, hard, brown.

Uses: Fuel, fence posts.

Habitat: Dry ridges and cliffs.

Range: Southern Indiana across to Kansas, south to Texas and Louisiana.

Distinguishing Features: The Black Hickory differs from the somewhat
      similar Pignut and Sweet Pignut Hickories by the yellow scales
      along the leafstalks.

    [Illustration: BLACK HICKORY]


                           MOCKERNUT HICKORY
                    _Carya tomentosa_ (Poir.) Nutt.

Other Name: White Hickory.

Growth Form: Medium or tall tree to 90 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      feet; crown rounded, the branchlets either erect or hanging.

Bark: Dark gray, shallowly furrowed, not scaly, often with a
      diamond-shaped pattern.

Twigs: Slender or relatively stout, usually hairy, gray; leaf scars
      alternate, 3-lobed, not elevated, with several bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, rounded or pointed at the tip, up to nearly 1 inch long,
      reddish-brown, hairy.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with 5-9 leaflets; leaflets
      broadly lanceolate to oblanceolate, pointed at the tip, rounded or
      tapering to the base, up to 8 inches long, about half as wide,
      finely toothed along the edge, yellow-green and hairy on the upper
      surface, paler and hairy on the lower surface.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing after the leaves have begun to unfold, minute,
      without petals, the staminate crowded in slender, drooping
      catkins, the pistillate in groups of 2-5.

Fruit: Ellipsoid or obovoid or spherical, up to 2 inches across, the
      husk reddish-brown, up to ¼ inch thick, smooth or slightly hairy,
      the nut sometimes 4-angled, reddish-brown, the seed sweet but
      small.

Wood: Heavy, hard, strong, coarse-grained, dark brown.

Uses: Tool handles, fuel, fence posts.

Habitat: Dry wooded slopes; shaded woods.

Range: Massachusetts across to southern Ontario, south to eastern Texas,
      east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Mockernut Hickory is distinguished from all
      other Illinois hickories by its usually 7 or 9 hairy leaflets with
      hairy leafstalks and hairy twigs. The large fruits with the small
      seeds within, which may account for the common name, are also
      distinctive.

    [Illustration: MOCKERNUT HICKORY]


                                CHESTNUT
                   _Castanea dentata_ (Marsh.) Borkh.

Growth Form: Large tree, formerly attaining a height of 100 feet; trunk
      diameter up to 3 feet; crown broadly rounded.

Bark: Dark brown, shallowly furrowed.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown, angular, glabrous or nearly so; leaf
      scars alternate, half-round, elevated, with several bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, up to ⅓ inch long, dark brown, smooth.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate,
      pointed at the tip, tapering to the base, up to 8 inches long and
      less than half as broad, coarsely toothed along the edges,
      yellow-green and smooth on the upper surface, paler and smooth on
      the lower surface; leafstalks up to ½ inch long, usually finely
      hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing in June after the leaves are fully grown, without
      petals, greenish or yellowish, the staminate many in elongated
      catkins up to 8 inches long, the pistillate 1-3 together.

Fruit: Spiny bur up to 2 inches in diameter, brown, splitting open to
      reveal 3 flattened nutlets.

Wood: Soft, light in weight, reddish-brown.

Uses: Furniture, interior finishing, fuel. The nuts are edible
      delicacies.

Habitat: Formerly in rocky woods, once occupying several acres near
      Olmstead in Pulaski County. Now virtually extinct, except for a
      few sprouts, due to a disease of the bark. A tree about 40 feet
      tall still exists near Little Grassy Lake in Williamson County.

Range: Maine to southern Ontario and southern Minnesota, south to
      Delaware, Kentucky, and southern Illinois, and in the mountains to
      central Alabama.

Distinguishing Features: In addition to its large, spiny fruits, the
      Chestnut can be distinguished by its sharply toothed leaves.
      Yellow Chestnut Oak may sometimes have similar leaves, but the
      pith of the oak is star-shaped.

    [Illustration: CHESTNUT]


                             COMMON CATALPA
                      _Catalpa bignonioides_ Walt.

Other Names: Lady Cigar Tree; Indian Bean.

Growth Form: Short to medium tree up to 40 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to 1 foot; crown broadly rounded.

Bark: Light brown, with thin, platy scales.

Twigs: Stout, smooth or slightly hairy, orange-brown to grayish, with
      conspicuous lenticels; leaf scars in whorls of 3, round-elliptic,
      elevated, with 12 or more bundle traces.

Buds: Round, reddish-brown, slightly hairy, very small.

Leaves: Whorled, simple; blades ovate, short-pointed at the tip,
      heart-shaped at the base, up to 8 inches long and about as broad,
      smooth along the edges, yellow-green and smooth on the upper
      surface, paler and finely hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks
      stout, smooth, up to 6 inches long.

Flowers: Large, showy, several in a large cluster, appearing in May and
      June, the clusters usually more than 6 inches long, each flower up
      to 2 inches long, the petals white and spotted with purple.

Fruit: Elongated capsules up to 1½ feet long and ½ inch thick, brown,
      splitting into 2 parts to reveal several winged, hairy seeds about
      1 inch long.

Wood: Light in weight, soft, coarse-grained, pale brown.

Uses: Fence posts, railroad ties; ornamental.

Habitat: Along railroads, streams, in fields; planted elsewhere.

Range: Native from Texas to Georgia and Florida; widely planted
      elsewhere.

Distinguishing Features: The leaves of this species, when crushed, give
      off a very unpleasant aroma.

    [Illustration: COMMON CATALPA]


                                CATALPA
                       _Catalpa speciosa_ Engelm.

Other Names: Western Catalpa; Lady Cigar Tree; Indian Bean.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 60 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      feet; crown broad, widely spreading.

Bark: Light brown, dark brown, or black, usually with rather deep
      furrows.

Twigs: Stout, smooth, brown, with conspicuous lenticels; leaf scars in
      whorls of 3, with one of the 3 scars smaller than the other 2,
      round-elliptic, elevated, with 12 or more bundle traces.

Buds: Round, brown to black, smooth, very small.

Leaves: Whorled, simple; blades ovate, long-pointed at the tip,
      heart-shaped at the base, up to 1 foot long and about ⅔ as broad,
      smooth along the edges, dark green and smooth or sparsely hairy on
      the upper surface, soft hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks
      stout, up to 6 inches long.

Flowers: Large, showy, several in an elongated cluster, appearing in May
      and June, the clusters up to six inches long, each flower up to 2½
      inches long, the petals white and lined with purple.

Fruit: Elongated capsules up to 1½ feet long and ¾ inch thick, brown,
      splitting into 2 parts to reveal several winged, hairy seeds about
      1 inch long.

Wood: Light in weight, soft, coarse-grained, pale brown.

Uses: Fence posts, interior finishing, railroad ties.

Habitat: Low woods; often planted in a variety of habitats.

Range: Southern Indiana, southern Illinois, and southern Missouri, south
      to Texas, Arkansas and Tennessee; commonly planted elsewhere.

Distinguishing Features: The two Catalpas in Illinois are hard to tell
      apart. This one usually has deeply furrowed bark, shorter clusters
      of flowers, petals merely lined with purple rather than spotted,
      and leaves which are not unpleasantly scented when crushed.

    [Illustration: CATALPA]


                               SUGARBERRY
                       _Celtis laevigata_ Willd.

Other Names: Southern Hackberry; Mississippi Hackberry.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 75 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2½
      feet; crown open and broad, with drooping branches.

Bark: Gray, with many conspicuous warts.

Twigs: Slender, gray or reddish-brown, smooth, sometimes zigzag; leaf
      scars alternate, usually crescent-shaped, slightly elevated, with
      3 bundle traces.

Buds: Slender, pointed, smooth, brown or gray, up to ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades usually lance-shaped, long-pointed at
      the tip, tapering or rounded at the asymmetrical base, up to 6
      inches long, less than half as broad, with few or no teeth along
      the edges, usually smooth or barely roughened on one or both
      surfaces; leafstalks up to ½ inch long, smooth or hairy.

Flowers: One to several in drooping clusters, appearing after the leaves
      are partly grown, greenish-yellow, without petals.

Fruit: Fleshy, ellipsoid to nearly round, reddish-orange to yellowish,
      about ¼ inch in diameter, with 1 seed, ripening in September or
      October, borne on slender, drooping stalks.

Wood: Heavy, soft, close-grained, pale yellow.

Uses: Fence posts, furniture.

Habitat: Lowland woods to dry hilltops.

Range: Virginia across to southern Missouri, south to Texas, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Sugarberry differs generally from other
      hackberries by its narrower, mostly toothless leaves.

    [Illustration: SUGARBERRY]


                               HACKBERRY
                        _Celtis occidentalis_ L.

Other Name: Sugarberry.

Growth Form: Medium or large tree up to 80 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to 5 feet; crown usually oblong, with many small branchlets.

Bark: Gray, smooth on young trees and soon bearing “warts,” becoming
      rough and scaly on old trees.

Twigs: Slender, gray to reddish-brown, smooth, sometimes zigzag; leaf
      scars alternate, usually crescent-shaped, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Slender, oval, pointed, brown or gray, finely hairy, about ¼ inch
      long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades ovate or broadly lance-shaped,
      long-pointed at the tip, rounded or tapering at the asymmetrical
      base, up to 6 inches long and up to half as broad, usually
      coarsely toothed along the edges except sometimes near the base,
      smooth or more often rough-hairy on one or both surfaces;
      leafstalks up to 1 inch long, smooth or hairy.

Flowers: Arranged in drooping clusters, or sometimes solitary, appearing
      after the leaves are partly grown, greenish-yellow, without
      petals.

Fruit: Fleshy, nearly round, dark purple, about ⅓ inch in diameter, with
      1 seed, ripening in September and October, borne on slender,
      drooping stalks.

Wood: Heavy, soft, close-grained, pale yellow.

Uses: Fence posts, furniture.

Habitat: Low woodlands.

Range: Massachusetts across to Manitoba and South Dakota, southern
      Oklahoma, Alabama, and Virginia.

Distinguishing Features: Hackberry leaves resemble those of some elms,
      but have 3 main veins arising from the base of the blade. This
      Hackberry differs from other hackberries in Illinois by its
      larger, usually coarsely toothed leaves and its larger, dark
      purple fruits.

    [Illustration: HACKBERRY]


                            DWARF HACKBERRY
                       _Celtis tenuifolia_ Nutt.

Growth Form: Small tree to 25 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 10 inches;
      crown irregular, with numerous slender branchlets.

Bark: Gray, smooth on young trees and soon bearing “warts,” becoming
      rough and scaly on old trees.

Twigs: Slender, green to reddish-brown, smooth at maturity; leaf scars
      alternate, crescent-shaped, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Slender, oval, pointed, grayish-brown, finely hairy, up to ⅛ inch
      long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades ovate, pointed at the tip, rounded or
      somewhat heart-shaped at the base, up to 3 inches long, often at
      least half as broad, with a few coarse teeth along the edges, or
      sometimes lacking teeth, often leathery, smooth or hairy on one or
      both surfaces; leafstalks up to ½ inch long, smooth or hairy.

Flowers: One or a few in drooping clusters, appearing after the leaves
      are partly grown, finely hairy, greenish-yellow, without petals.

Fruit: Fleshy, spherical, reddish-purple, up to ½ inch in diameter,
      1-seeded, ripening September and October.

Wood: Heavy, close-grained, yellowish.

Use: Fence posts.

Habitat: Edge of bluffs, woods.

Range: New Jersey across to Illinois and Kansas, south to Oklahoma,
      Louisiana, and northern Florida.

Distinguishing Features: This small tree is extremely variable in that
      its leaves may or may not have teeth, they may or may not be
      hairy, and they may or may not be leathery. It differs from the
      Sugarberry primarily by its broader leaves and from the Common
      Hackberry by its smaller fruits and usually less-toothed leaves.

    [Illustration: DWARF HACKBERRY]


                                 REDBUD
                         _Cercis canadensis_ L.

Growth Form: Small tree to 35 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1 foot;
      crown usually broad and flattened.

Bark: Reddish-brown, separating into long plates and thin scales.

Twigs: Slender, zigzag, smooth, angular, brown; leaf scars alternate,
      somewhat elevated, triangular, hairy across the top, with 3 bundle
      traces.

Buds: Small, rounded, chestnut-brown, smooth or nearly so.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades heart-shaped, contracted to a short
      point at the tip, up to 6 inches long and nearly as broad, smooth
      on the upper surface, smooth or with some hairs on the lower
      surface, without teeth along the edges; leafstalks slender, up to
      5 inches long, usually smooth.

Flowers: In small clusters on last year’s branches or on the trunks,
      rose-purple, each pea-shaped, about ½ inch long, appearing when
      the leaves are first beginning to unfold.

Fruit: Legumes up to 4 inches long and ½ inch broad, flat, smooth, brown
      at maturity, with several seeds.

Wood: Hard, heavy, close-grained, dark reddish-brown.

Use: The major importance of this small tree lies in its value as an
      ornamental, because of its spectacular appearance when in flower.

Habitat: Rich woods.

Range: Connecticut across to southern Wisconsin, south to Texas, east to
      northern Florida; also Mexico.

Distinguishing Features: The heart-shaped, toothless leaves easily
      identify this tree.

    [Illustration: REDBUD]


                               YELLOWWOOD
                 _Cladrastis lutea_ (Michx. f.) K. Koch

Growth Form: Small to medium tree to 45 feet tall; trunk diameter up to
      14 inches; crown widely spreading.

Bark: Gray, smooth.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown, with some lenticels, somewhat zigzag;
      leaf scars alternate, narrow and completely encircling the bud,
      with 3-7 bundle traces.

Buds: Three or four crowded together, resembling at first a single bud,
      hairy, without scales, covered at first by the hollow base of the
      leafstalk.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with 7-11 leaflets; leaflets
      oval, pointed at the tip, tapering to the base, up to 4 inches
      long and up to half as wide, smooth on both surfaces, toothless
      along the edges. The leaflets turn yellow in the autumn.

Flowers: In long, drooping clusters up to 1 foot long, white, slightly
      fragrant, appearing during June.

Fruit: Legumes up to 4 inches long and about ½ inch wide, flat, smooth,
      pale brown, with 4-6 seeds.

Wood: Hard, heavy, strong, close-grained, yellow to light brown.

Uses: Fuel. In olden days, a yellow dye was extracted from this tree.

Habitat: Rich, wooded slopes.

Range: North Carolina across to southern Missouri and Arkansas, south to
      northern Alabama and northern Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The large, pinnately compound leaflets and the
      smooth, gray trunk distinguish this tree.

    [Illustration: YELLOWWOOD]


                        ALTERNATE-LEAVED DOGWOOD
                        _Cornus alternifolia_ L.

Growth Form: Small tree to 20 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3 inches;
      crown flattened.

Bark: Brown, slightly roughened, with shallow furrows.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown or greenish, smooth; leaf scars alternate,
      crescent-shaped, somewhat elevated, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Narrowly ovoid, pointed, smooth, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, although often clustered toward the tip of the twig,
      simple; blades oval to ovate, pointed at the tip, tapering or
      rounded at the base, up to 5 inches long, about half as broad, the
      edges smooth or finely round-toothed, green and mostly smooth on
      the upper surface, paler and frequently hairy on the lower
      surface; leafstalks up to 2 inches long, usually finely hairy.

Flowers: Several in crowded round-topped clusters, appearing in May and
      June, each flower white, with 4 narrow petals.

Fruit: Blue, spherical berries up to ⅓ inch in diameter, borne on a red
      stalk.

Wood: Heavy, hard, close-grained, brown.

Use: Tool handles.

Habitat: Rich woods.

Range: Newfoundland across to southern Ontario and Minnesota, south to
      Missouri, Alabama, and Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: This is the only American dogwood with the
      leaves arranged in an alternate manner.

    [Illustration: ALTERNATE-LEAVED DOGWOOD]


                          ROUGH-LEAVED DOGWOOD
                       _Cornus drummondii_ Meyer

Growth Form: Small tree to 30 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3 inches;
      crown open and irregular.

Bark: Reddish-brown, scaly, shallowly furrowed.

Twigs: Slender, pale brown, purplish, or gray, smooth or slightly hairy;
      leaf scars opposite, crescent-shaped, slightly elevated, with 3
      bundle traces.

Buds: Slender, flattened, pointed, finely hairy, up to ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades elliptic to narrowly ovate, pointed at
      the tip, tapering to rounded at the base, up to 4 inches long, up
      to half as wide, smooth along the edges, green and with short
      hairs on the upper surface, paler and hairy on lower surface;
      leafstalks up to ½ inch long, hairy.

Flowers: Several in round-topped clusters, appearing in May and June,
      each flower white, with 4 narrow petals.

Fruit: White, spherical berries up to ¼ inch in diameter, borne on red
      stalks.

Wood: Hard, heavy, close-grained, brown.

Use: Tool handles.

Habitat: Woods; edges of prairies.

Range: New York across to Minnesota, south to Nebraska and Texas, east
      to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: This is the only dogwood in Illinois that is
      rough-hairy on the upper surface of the leaves.

    [Illustration: ROUGH-LEAVED DOGWOOD]


                           FLOWERING DOGWOOD
                          _Cornus florida_ L.

Growth Form: Small to medium tree to 40 feet tall; trunk diameter rarely
      more than 2 feet; crown rounded.

Bark: Brown, divided into squarish plates.

Twigs: Slender, greenish to light brown, smooth, often curving upward at
      the tip; leaf scars opposite, crescent-shaped, elevated, with 3
      bundle traces.

Buds: Of two kinds, the leaf buds slender, pointed, the flower buds flat
      and biscuit-shaped.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades elliptic to ovate, pointed at the tip,
      tapering or rounded at the base, up to 6 inches long, less than
      half as broad, the veins deeply impressed, the edges without
      teeth, green and smooth or sparsely hairy on the upper surface,
      pale and finely hairy or sometimes smooth on the lower surface;
      leafstalks up to ¾ inch long, smooth or finely hairy.

Flowers: Several crowded together in a yellow-green cluster, each
      cluster subtended by 4 large white petal-like bracts, appearing in
      late April and May.

Fruit: Red, ovoid berries up to ½ inch long, shiny, with mealy flesh and
      1 or 2 seeds.

Wood: Hard, strong, heavy, close-grained, brown.

Uses: The wood is used in the making of tool handles, although the real
      value of the Flowering Dogwood is its ornamental potential.

Habitat: Woods.

Range: Maine across to Kansas, south to Texas, east to Florida; also in
      Mexico.

Distinguishing Features: The opposite, toothless leaves with deeply
      impressed veins distinguish this species.

    [Illustration: FLOWERING DOGWOOD]


                             OTHER DOGWOODS

Several other dogwoods, most of them rarely if ever attaining the
stature of small trees, occur in Illinois.

Gray Dogwood (_Cornus racemosa_ Lam.). This plant rarely exceeds a
height of 10 feet. It is distinguished by its slender gray twigs, its
small white flowers borne in clusters about as broad as high, and its
white berries about ¼ inch in diameter. The Racemose Dogwood occurs in a
variety of habitats, including prairies and woods.

Stiff Dogwood (_Cornus foemina_ Mill.). This small dogwood has brownish
twigs with white pith and bluish fruits. Its leaves usually are smooth
on both surfaces. It occurs in low, wet woods.

Round-leaved Dogwood (_Cornus rugosa_ Lam.). As the name implies, this
shrubby dogwood has roundish leaves which are woolly on the lower
surface. The greenish twigs have white pith. The berries are pale blue.
The Round-leaved Dogwood grows in dry, rocky woods.

Red Osier (_Cornus stolonifera_ Michx.). Red Osier has dark red twigs
with white pith. The leaves are pale and somewhat hairy on the lower
surface. The berries are white or grayish. Red Osier usually grows along
shores, often forming thickets.

Silky Dogwood (_Cornus obliqua_ Raf.). This plant is usually a shrub,
but may get as much as 15 feet tall. It has twigs with pale brown pith.
The leaves are pale on the lower surface, and usually have white,
appressed hairs. The berries are blue. Silky Dogwood grows in low
ground.

Willow Dogwood (_Cornus amomum_ Mill.). The Willow Dogwood rarely
exceeds a height of 10 feet. Like the Silky Dogwood, it has twigs with
pale brown pith. The leaves usually have reddish-colored hairs on the
lower surface. The berries are pale blue. Willow Dogwood grows in low
ground.

    [Illustration: Gray Dogwood]


                            COCK-SPUR THORN
                       _Crataegus crus-galli_ L.

Growth Form: Small tree to 20 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 8 inches;
      crown broadly rounded.

Bark: Dark brown, scaly.

Twigs: Moderately stout, light brown, smooth, usually with sharp spines
      up to 4 inches long; leaf scars alternate, crescent-shaped,
      slightly elevated, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded, up to ¼ inch in diameter, reddish-brown, usually smooth.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades broadest above the middle, rounded or
      short-pointed at the tip, tapering to the base, up to 4 inches
      long, up to 1½ inches broad, leathery, toothed along the edges, at
      least in the upper half of the leaf, dark green, smooth, shiny on
      the upper surface, paler and smooth on the lower surface;
      leafstalks stout, up to 1 inch long, smooth.

Flowers: Showy, several in a cluster, appearing in May and June, each up
      to ¾ inch across, with 5 white petals.

Fruit: Spherical or nearly so, up to ½ inch in diameter, red, fleshy but
      dry, with 1-2 nutlets.

Wood: Heavy, hard, close-grained, brown.

Use: Sometimes grown as an ornamental.

Habitat: Wooded slopes, thickets.

Range: Southern Ontario across to Minnesota, south to Texas, east to
      South Carolina.

Distinguishing Features: Cock-spur Thorn differs from most other
      hawthorns in Illinois by its leathery, shiny leaves which are
      broadest above the middle.

    [Illustration: COCK-SPUR THORN]


                                RED HAW
               _Crataegus mollis_ (Torr. & Gray) Scheele

Growth Form: Small tree to 25 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 14 inches;
      crown widely spreading.

Bark: Gray-brown, scaly, deeply furrowed.

Twigs: Moderately stout, gray or brown, smooth or slightly hairy, rarely
      with spines; leaf scars alternate, crescent-shaped, slightly
      elevated, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded, up to ¼ inch in diameter, reddish-brown, usually hairy.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades ovate, broadest near the base,
      short-pointed at the tip, rounded at the base, up to 4 inches long
      and nearly as broad, coarsely toothed along the edges,
      occasionally with shallow lobes, yellow-green and hairy on the
      upper surface, paler and hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks
      stout, up to 1 inch long, hairy.

Flowers: Showy, several in a cluster, appearing in April and May, each
      up to 1 inch across, with 5 white petals.

Fruit: Spherical or nearly so, up to 1 inch in diameter, red, fleshy but
      dry, with 4-5 nutlets.

Wood: Heavy, hard, close-grained, brown.

Habitat: Moist woods.

Range: Southern Ontario across to Minnesota, south to Oklahoma, east to
      Alabama.

Distinguishing Features: The Red Haw is distinguished by its densely
      hairy, ovate leaves which are often shallowly lobed.

    [Illustration: RED HAW]


                              PRUINOSE HAW
                 _Crataegus pruinosa_ (Wendl.) K. Koch

Growth Form: Small tree to 15 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 8 inches;
      crown broad and irregular.

Bark: Dark gray, scaly, furrowed.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown, smooth, with spines up to 2 inches long;
      leaf scars alternate, crescent-shaped, slightly elevated, with 3
      bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded, up to ⅛ inch in diameter, reddish-brown, smooth or nearly
      so.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades mostly ovate, broadest below the
      middle, pointed at the tip, rounded at the base, up to 3 inches
      long and about ⅔ as broad, coarsely toothed along the edges and
      frequently shallowly lobed, bluish-green and smooth on the upper
      surface, paler and smooth on the lower surface; leafstalks stout,
      up to 1 inch long, smooth or somewhat hairy.

Flowers: Showy, several in a cluster, appearing in May and early June,
      each up to 1 inch across, with 5 white petals.

Fruit: Spherical or nearly so, up to ¾ inch in diameter, dark red to
      purple, fleshy but dry, with 5 nutlets.

Wood: Heavy, hard, close-grained, brown.

Habitat: Woods and thickets.

Range: Newfoundland to southern Ontario, south to Arkansas, east to
      North Carolina.

Distinguishing Features: The Pruinose Haw is distinguished by its
      bluish-green leaves which are widest just below the middle.

    [Illustration: PRUINOSE HAW]


                            OTHER HAWTHORNS

Many other hawthorns occur in Illinois. Several of them have been found
only a very few times. Most of them are difficult to distinguish unless
leaves, flowers, and fruits are available. A few of the hawthorns which
are likely to be encountered are described on this and the following
page.

Scarlet Hawthorn (_Crataegus coccinioides_ Ashe). This hawthorn grows to
a height of 15 feet and has very scaly brown bark. The slender gray
twigs have many stout, sharp spines up to 2 inches long. The ovate
leaves are coarsely toothed and usually shallowly lobed. There are some
hairs on both surfaces of the leaves. The spherical fruits, when mature,
are deep red speckled with several pale dots. There are usually 5
nutlets inside each fruit. The Scarlet Hawthorn is found primarily on
rocky hills.

Urn-shaped Hawthorn (_Crataegus calpodendron_ (Ehrh.) Medic.) The
Urn-shaped Hawthorn is named for the shape of its fruit, which is
usually about ½ inch long, red, with sweet flesh and 2-3 nutlets inside.
This small tree only grows to a height of about 15 feet. The leaves are
usually ovate and are coarsely toothed and often shallowly lobed. They
have a greenish-yellow color and are hairy, at least on the underneath
surface. This hawthorn frequently grows along rocky streams.

    [Illustration: Urn-Shaped Hawthorn]

Green Haw (_Crataegus viridis_ L.). The Green Haw is primarily a tree of
low, wet woods, where it grows to a height of nearly 30 feet and has a
gray, scaly bark. The rather variable leaves range from elliptic to
elliptic-ovate and toothed to occasionally shallowly lobed. The leaves
are thin and smooth on both surfaces, except for some tufts of hair
along the axils of the veins on the lower surface. The orange-red fruits
are spherical and about ⅓ inch in diameter. There are 5 nutlets embedded
in the rather sweet flesh.

Dotted Haw (_Crataegus punctata_ Jacq.). This hawthorn grows to a height
of about 20 feet and has many stout thorns on its twigs. The leaves
generally are broadest above the middle and are obovate. The edges of
the leaves are usually toothed from the middle to the tip. Sometimes
lobes are formed. The leaves have a relatively thick texture and are
hairy on the veins of the under surface of the leaves. The usually
spherical fruit is about ¾ inch in diameter and contains 3 or 5 nutlets.
The Dotted Thorn often forms thickets along the edges of woods or in
rocky fields.

    [Illustration: Green Hawthorn
    Dotted Hawthorn]


                               PERSIMMON
                       _Diospyros virginiana_ L.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 50 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1
      foot; crown broad and rounded or flattened. (At one time in the
      Wabash Valley, Persimmon trees nearly 3 feet in diameter were
      known.)

Bark: Dark gray to black, broken at maturity into squarish blocks.

Twigs: Slender, brown, smooth or hairy, usually with lenticels; leaf
      scars alternate, half-elliptic, with 1 bundle trace.

Buds: More or less rounded, smooth, dark reddish-brown, up to ⅛ inch
      long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades elliptic to oval, pointed at the tip,
      tapering or rounded at the base, up to 5 inches long and about
      half as broad, smooth along the edges, dark green, smooth, and
      shiny on the upper surface, paler and smooth on the lower surface;
      leafstalks stout, up to 1 inch long, smooth or sparsely hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate usually borne on separate trees,
      appearing after the leaves are half grown, the staminate in
      clusters of 2-3, tubular, up to ½ inch long, the pistillate
      solitary, ½ to ¾ inch long. Sometimes flowers with both stamens
      and pistils can be found.

Fruit: Fleshy, spherical, but with the greenish calyx persistent at one
      end, yellow-orange to orange (rarely blue), up to 2 inches in
      diameter, sweet when ripe, few-seeded.

Wood: Heavy, hard, the heartwood nearly black.

Uses: Golf club heads, billiard cues.

Habitat: Dry woods, rich bottomland woods, edge of fields, fence rows.

Range: Connecticut across to southern Iowa and eastern Kansas, south to
      eastern Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The leaves of the Persimmon are most often
      confused with those of the Sour Gum, but usually the tip is not as
      abruptly pointed in the Persimmon. The pith of the Persimmon also
      lacks the distinct partitions found in the Sour Gum.

    [Illustration: PERSIMMON]


                                 BEECH
                       _Fagus grandifolia_ Ehrh.

Growth Form: Large tree to nearly 100 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 4
      feet; crown widely spreading, usually rounded.

Bark: Smooth, gray, thin, often marred by human carving.

Twigs: Gray or yellowish, slender, smooth, more or less zigzag; leaf
      scars alternate, half-round, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Slender, narrow, long-pointed, smooth, reddish-brown, up to ¾ inch
      long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades up to 4 inches long and 2½ inches
      broad, oblong, pointed at the tip, rounded or tapering to the
      somewhat asymmetrical base, coarsely toothed along the edges,
      blue-green to yellow-green, smooth and shiny on the upper surface,
      smooth or finely hairy on the lower surface; leaf stalk very
      short, sometimes hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately on the same tree,
      appearing after the leaves have unfolded, the staminate numerous
      in small spherical heads, the pistillate in groups of 2.

Fruit: Spiny burs up to ¾ inch long, prickly, reddish-brown, containing
      1-3 triangular nuts.

Wood: Hard, strong, close-grained, deep reddish-brown.

Uses: Fuel, chairs, tool handles.

Habitat: Rich woods.

Range: Nova Scotia across to Ontario, south to eastern Texas, east to
      northern Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The stately Beech is recognized by its smooth
      gray bark and its long, pointed winter buds.

    [Illustration: BEECH]


                              SWAMP PRIVET
                 _Forestiera acuminata_ (Michx.) Poir.

Growth Form: Small tree to 30 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 5 inches;
      crown spreading, irregular.

Bark: Brown, shallowly furrowed or nearly smooth.

Twigs: Slender, brown, warty or smooth; leaf scars opposite,
      shield-shaped, with 1 bundle trace.

Buds: Spherical, up to ⅛ inch in diameter, smooth.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades elliptic, pointed at the tip, tapering
      to the base, up to 4 inches long, up to 1½ inches broad, finely
      toothed along part of the edges, yellow-green and nearly smooth on
      the upper surface, paler and smooth on the lower surface;
      leafstalks slender, usually smooth, up to ½ inch long.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately on different trees,
      appearing before the leaves begin to unfold; staminate many in
      rounded clusters, yellow, without petals; pistillate several in
      branched clusters, yellowish, without petals.

Fruit: Slender, oblong, slightly curved, dark purple, about 1 inch long,
      up to ¼ inch wide, fleshy but dry, containing 1 seed.

Use: Occasionally planted as an ornamental.

Habitat: Swamps, along rivers.

Range: South Carolina across to Kansas, south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Swamp Privet is distinguished by its opposite,
      pointed leaves which are finely toothed along the edges.

    [Illustration: SWAMP PRIVET]


                               WHITE ASH
                        _Fraxinus americana_ L.

Growth Form: Large tree up to 100 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 4
      feet; crown pyramidal or ovoid, with slender branches; trunk
      straight, columnar.

Bark: Light or dark gray, with diamond-shaped furrows between
      flat-topped, sometimes scaly, ridges.

Twigs: Slender, gray or brown, sometimes with a few hairs; leaf scars
      opposite, horseshoe-shaped, with several bundle traces forming a
      half-moon.

Buds: Rounded, dark brown, finely hairy, up to ½ inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, pinnately compound, with 5-9 leaflets; leaflets
      lance-shaped to lance-ovate, often curved, pointed at the tip,
      rounded or tapering to the base, up to 5 inches long and about
      half as broad, shallowly toothed along the edges, green and smooth
      on the upper surface, paler and smooth or hairy on the lower
      surface.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne on separate trees before the
      leaves begin to expand, minute, without petals, purplish, in
      crowded clusters, soon becoming elongated and less crowded.

Fruit: Paddle-shaped, winged, up to 2½ inches long and ¼ inch wide,
      several in a cluster, 1-seeded at the base.

Wood: Heavy, strong, hard, coarse-grained, brown.

Uses: Furniture, baseball bats, tool handles, interior finishing.

Habitat: Bottomlands and wooded slopes.

Range: Nova Scotia across to Minnesota, south to Texas and Florida.

Distinguishing Features: White Ash differs from Green Ash in having
      distinctly paler lower leaf surfaces. Plants with hairy leaves
      resemble Red Ash, but the fruits do not have the wing extending
      down beyond the seed in the White Ash.

    [Illustration: WHITE ASH]


                               BLACK ASH
                        _Fraxinus nigra_ Marsh.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 70 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2
      feet; crown broadly rounded, with many stout, straight branches.

Bark: Light gray, scaly, without diamond-shaped furrows.

Twigs: Stout, gray or brown, smooth; leaf scars elliptic or oval, with
      several bundle traces arranged in a half moon.

Buds: Conical, blue-black, finely hairy, about one-fourth inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, pinnately compound, with 7-11 leaflets; leaflets
      without stalks, lance-shaped, long-pointed at the tip, tapering or
      rounded at the sometimes asymmetrical base, up to 6 inches long,
      less than one-half as wide, toothed along the edges, dark green
      and smooth on the upper surface, paler and with rusty hairs along
      the veins on the lower surface. The leaflets turn reddish-brown in
      the autumn.

Flowers: Small, in elongated clusters, appearing before the leaves begin
      to unfold, purplish, without any petals, some with both stamens
      and pistils, others only with stamens, others only with pistils.

Fruit: Oblong, winged fruits, barely notched at the tip, up to 1½ inches
      long, up to one-half inch broad, with a single seed at the base.

Wood: Soft, heavy, dark brown.

Uses: Cabinets, baskets, fence posts.

Habitat: Swampy woods.

Range: Newfoundland across to Manitoba, south to Iowa, central Illinois,
      West Virginia, and Delaware.

Distinguishing Features: This is the only ash in Illinois where none of
      the leaflets has stalks.

    [Illustration: BLACK ASH]


                                RED ASH
                    _Fraxinus pennsylvanica_ Marsh.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 60 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2
      feet; crown usually pyramidal; trunk straight, rather stout,
      sometimes slightly buttressed at base.

Bark: Light or dark gray, with diamond-shaped furrows between
      flat-topped, sometimes scaly ridges.

Twigs: Slender to rather stout, gray or brown, covered by velvety hairs,
      leaf scars opposite, half-round and straight across the top, with
      several bundle traces forming a half-moon.

Buds: Rounded, dark brown, finely hairy, about ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, pinnately compound, with 7-9 leaflets; leaflets
      elliptic to elliptic-ovate, pointed at the tip, tapering to the
      base, up to 6 inches long, about ⅓ as wide, sparsely toothed along
      the edges, hairy on both surfaces.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate on separate trees, appearing after the
      leaves have begun to open, minute, crowded in purplish or greenish
      dense clusters.

Fruit: A cluster of paddle-shaped fruits, each fruit up to 2½ inches
      long and less than ½ inch broad, with a single seed at one end.

Wood: Hard, strong, heavy, coarse-grained, pale brown.

Uses: Tool handles, interior finishing, furniture.

Habitat: Bottomland forests.

Range: Nova Scotia across to North Dakota, south to Kansas, east to
      Louisiana and northern Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Red Ash is characterized by its hairy leaf
      stalks and its narrow wings along the stalks between the leaflets.

    [Illustration: RED ASH]


                               GREEN ASH
   _Fraxinus pennsylvanica_ Marsh var. _subintegerrima_ (Vahl) Fern.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 60 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2½
      feet; crown broadly rounded, with slender, spreading branches.

Bark: Light or dark gray, with diamond-shaped furrows between
      flat-topped, sometimes scaly, ridges.

Twigs: Slender to rather stout, gray or brown, smooth; leaf scars
      half-round and straight across the top, with several bundle traces
      forming a half-moon.

Buds: Rounded, dark brown, finely hairy, up to one-fourth inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, pinnately compound, with 7-9 leaflets; leaflets
      lance-shaped to elliptic, long-pointed at the tip, tapering to the
      base, up to 6 inches long and one-and-one-half inches wide,
      toothed along the edges, green and smooth on both surfaces. The
      leaflets turn reddish-brown or yellowish in the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne on separate trees, in
      branched clusters, appearing as the leaves begin to unfold, small,
      purplish, without petals.

Fruit: Lance-shaped or reversely lance-shaped, winged fruits, usually
      rounded at the tip, up to 2½ inches long and less than one-third
      inch broad, with a single seed at the base.

Wood: Hard, heavy, strong, light brown.

Uses: Interior finishing, tool handles, baseball bats; sometimes grown
      as an ornamental.

Habitat: Bottomland forests.

Range: Maine across to Saskatchewan and Minnesota, south to Texas, east
      to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Green Ash has leaflets which are green on
      both surfaces.

    [Illustration: GREEN ASH]


                                BLUE ASH
                    _Fraxinus quadrangulata_ Michx.

Other Name: Square-stemmed Ash.

Growth Form: Moderate tree to seventy feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      feet; crown irregular, with many short, sturdy branches.

Bark: Gray, scaly, without diamond-shaped furrows.

Twigs: Stout, square, gray or brown, smooth; leaf scars half-round and
      concave across the top, with several bundle traces forming a
      half-moon.

Buds: Rounded, gray, finely hairy, up to one-half inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, pinnately compound, with 5-11 leaflets; leaflets
      lance-shaped, long-pointed at the tip tapering to the sometimes
      asymmetrical base, up to 6 inches long, less than half as wide,
      coarsely toothed along the edges, yellowish-green and smooth on
      the upper surface, paler and usually with tufts of hairs along the
      veins on the lower surface. The leaflets turn yellow in the
      autumn.

Flowers: Small, in branched clusters, appearing as the leaves begin to
      unfold, purplish, without any petals.

Fruit: Oblong, winged fruits, notched at the tip, up to 2 inches long
      and one-half inch broad, with a single seed near the bottom.

Wood: Hard, heavy, yellow-brown.

Uses: Flooring; the inner bark produces a blue dye when placed in water.

Habitat: Wooded slopes, limestone cliffs.

Range: Western Pennsylvania across Wisconsin to Iowa, south to Oklahoma,
      Arkansas, and Alabama; southern Ontario.

Distinguishing Features: The square stems immediately distinguish this
      tree from any other ash in Illinois.

    [Illustration: BLUE ASH]


                              PUMPKIN ASH
                     _Fraxinus tomentosa_ Michx. f.

Growth Form: Large tree sometimes nearly 100 feet tall; trunk diameter
      up to 3 feet; crown broadly rounded, with stout spreading
      branches.

Bark: Gray, becoming scaly.

Twigs: Stout, gray or brown, usually velvety; leaf scars opposite,
      horseshoe-shaped, with several bundle traces arranged in a
      half-moon.

Buds: More or less conical, brown, hairy, about one-fourth inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, compound, with 7-9 leaflets; leaflets lance-shaped to
      elliptic, pointed at the tip, rounded or tapering at the slightly
      asymmetrical base, up to 10 inches long and about half as wide,
      smooth or finely toothed along the edges, yellow-green and smooth
      on the upper surface, paler and velvety-hairy on the lower
      surface. The leaves turn yellow in the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne on separate trees, in
      elongated clusters, appearing before the leaves, small,
      greenish-purple, without any petals.

Fruit: Oblong, winged fruits, usually rounded at the tip, up to 3 inches
      long and one-half inch broad, with a single seed near the bottom.

Wood: Heavy, strong, hard, close-grained, brown.

Uses: Boxes, paper pulp, fuel.

Habitat: Floodplains, swamps.

Range: New York across Ohio to southern Illinois and southern Missouri,
      south to Louisiana, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Pumpkin Ash is the only ash in Illinois
      with velvety-hairy twigs and usually toothless leaves.

    [Illustration: PUMPKIN ASH]


                              WATER LOCUST
                      _Gleditsia aquatica_ Marsh.

Growth Form: Small to medium tree to 60 feet tall; trunk diameter up to
      2 feet; crown widely but irregularly spreading; trunk short and
      stout.

Bark: Dark gray or dark brown, shallowly furrowed.

Twigs: Slender, gray or brown, smooth, usually with unbranched thorns;
      leaf scars alternate, more or less 3-lobed, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded, nearly hidden beneath the leaf scars, dark brown, smooth,
      up to ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, both singly and doubly pinnately compound on the same
      tree, with many leaflets; leaflets oblong to oblong-ovate, rounded
      or slightly pointed at the tip, rounded at the slightly
      asymmetrical base, toothless or minutely toothed along the edges,
      smooth except for some hairs along the veins, up to 1 inch long,
      about half as wide.

Flowers: Some flowers with both stamens and pistils, others with only
      one or the other, in elongated clusters up to 4 inches long,
      greenish, small, appearing in May and June.

Fruit: Short, pointed legumes up to 2 inches long and 1 inch broad,
      borne several in a drooping cluster, chestnut-brown, smooth, with
      1 or 2 seeds and no pulp.

Wood: Hard, heavy, coarse-grained, reddish-brown.

Uses: Fence posts, coarse construction.

Habitat: Swampy woods.

Range: North Carolina across to southern Missouri, south to Texas, east
      to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The short, 1- or 2-seeded legume without pulp
      differentiates this locust from the Honey Locust.

    [Illustration: WATER LOCUST]


                              HONEY LOCUST
                       _Gleditsia triacanthos_ L.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 70 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3 feet;
      crown broadly rounded, often with dropping outer branches; trunk
      straight, rather stout, usually with large, purple-brown, 3-parted
      thorns.

Bark: Dark brown, deeply furrowed and scaly at maturity.

Twigs: Slender, angular, reddish-brown, smooth, zigzag, with 3-parted or
      unbranched thorns; leaf scars alternate, more or less 3-lobed,
      with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded, nearly hidden beneath the leaf scars, dark brown, smooth,
      up to ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, often doubly pinnately compound, with many leaflets;
      leaflets oblong to oblong-lanceolate, rounded or slightly pointed
      at the tip, rounded at the slightly asymmetrical base, minutely
      toothed along the edges, smooth except for some hairs along the
      veins, up to 1½ inches long, less than half as wide.

Flowers: Some flowers with both stamens and pistils, others with only
      one or the other, in elongated clusters up to 3 inches long,
      yellowish, small, appearing in May and June.

Fruit: Elongated legumes up to 1½ feet long and up to 2 inches wide,
      flat, often twisted or curved, purple-brown, containing several
      seeds embedded in a thick pulp.

Wood: Hard, strong, coarse-grained, reddish-brown.

Uses: Fence posts, coarse construction; a spineless form sometimes
      cultivated.

Habitat: Moist, wooded ravines, thickets, along roads.

Range: New York across to South Dakota, south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Honey Locust has more leaflets than any other
      kind of tree in Illinois. The large 3-parted spines and the long
      fruits are also distinctive.

    [Illustration: HONEY LOCUST]


                          KENTUCKY COFFEE TREE
                   _Gymnocladus dioicus_ (L.) K. Koch

Growth Form: Medium to large tree to 85 feet tall; trunk diameter up to
      2½ feet; crown with a narrow, rounded top; trunk stout, usually
      branching a few feet above the ground.

Bark: Dark gray, deeply furrowed and scaly at maturity.

Twigs: Stout, dark brown with orange lenticels, slightly hairy; leaf
      scars alternate, heart-shaped, with 3 or 5 bundle traces; pith
      chocolate-colored.

Buds: Tiny, sunken in hairy cavities immediately above each leaf scar.

Leaves: Alternate, doubly pinnately compound, with many leaflets;
      leaflets ovate, pointed at the tip, rounded at the base, up to 2
      inches long and about half as broad, without teeth along the edge,
      dark green and smooth on the upper surface, yellow-green and
      smooth or hairy on the veins on the lower surface.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately on separate trees, in
      more or less elongated, greenish clusters, appearing after the
      leaves have unfolded, each flower with 5 oblong, hairy petals.

Fruit: Short, thick legumes up to 10 inches long and up to 2 inches
      wide, dark brown, leathery, smooth, containing several large seeds
      embedded in a thick, sweet pulp.

Wood: Heavy, strong, durable, coarse-grained, reddish-brown.

Uses: Fence posts, fuel, rough construction. The seeds can be used as a
      substitute for coffee.

Habitat: Rich, often bottomland, woods.

Range: New York across to South Dakota, south to Oklahoma, east to
      Tennessee.

Distinguishing Features: The doubly compound leaves with large leaflets,
      the short, thick legumes, and the thick twigs with sunken buds
      readily distinguish this tree. It is one of the last trees to put
      forth its leaves in the spring.

    [Illustration: KENTUCKY COFFEE TREE]


                              SILVER BELL
                         _Halesia carolina_ L.

Growth Form: Small tree to 30 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 8 inches;
      crown widely spreading.

Bark: Reddish-brown, with whitish stripes, somewhat scaly.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown, usually smooth; leaf scars alternate,
      half-round, with a cluster of bundle scars.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, reddish-brown, somewhat hairy, up to ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades oval to elliptic, pointed at the tip,
      tapering to rounded at the base, up to 6 inches long, about half
      as broad, finely toothed along the edges, dark green and usually
      smooth on the upper surface, paler and smooth or slightly hairy on
      the lower surface; leafstalks slender, smooth or finely hairy, up
      to ½ inch long.

Flowers: Few in hanging clusters, showy, white, each bell-shaped and up
      to one inch long, appearing in April.

Fruit: 4-winged, dry, brown, up to 2 inches long, containing 1 seed.

Wood: Light in weight, soft, close-grained, brown.

Use: Occasionally grown as an ornamental.

Habitat: Rich woods.

Range: Virginia across southern Illinois to Oklahoma, south to Texas,
      east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The bell-shaped white flowers and the 4-winged
      fruits readily distinguish this handsome tree.

    [Illustration: SILVER BELL]


                              WITCH HAZEL
                       _Hamamelis virginiana_ L.

Growth Form: Small tree to 25 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 10 inches;
      crown broadly rounded.

Bark: Light brown, eventually broken into small scales.

Twigs: Slender, flexible, brown, hairy at first but becoming smooth;
      leaf scars alternate, half-round, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Narrow, pointed, finely hairy, orange-brown, up to ½ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades obovate, rounded or short-pointed at
      the tip, rounded or sometimes tapering to the base, up to 6 inches
      long, sometimes nearly half as broad, usually with several low,
      rounded teeth, dark green and usually somewhat hairy on the upper
      surface, paler and hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks up to ¾
      inch long, slightly hairy.

Flowers: Blooming from September to November, several in a cluster, each
      with 4 bright yellow, strap-shaped petals up to ⅔ inch long.

Fruit: Capsules up to ½ long, brown, hairy, splitting open during the
      following autumn to liberate several small, shiny seeds.

Wood: Hard, heavy, close-grained, light brown.

Uses: Planted as an ornamental. The astringent witch hazel is derived
      from this plant.

Habitat: Woodlands.

Range: Southern Quebec across to Minnesota, south to Missouri,
      Tennessee, and Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The late-flowering period and the obovate
      leaves with shallow, rounded teeth characterize the Witch Hazel.

    [Illustration: WITCH HAZEL]


                              SWAMP HOLLY
                          _Ilex decidua_ Walt.

Other Name: Possum Haw; Deciduous Holly.

Growth Form: Small tree up to 20 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      inches; crown spreading.

Bark: Light brown, more or less warty.

Twigs: Slender, gray, smooth or slightly hairy, often with short spurs;
      leaf scars alternate, crescent-shaped, slightly elevated, with 1
      bundle trace.

Buds: Rounded, gray, up to ⅛ inch in diameter.

Leaves: Alternate, simple, sometimes clustered at the tips of the short
      spur-like twigs; blades narrowly oblong to elliptic, short-pointed
      or rounded at the tip, tapering to the base, up to 3 inches long,
      less than ½ as broad, sparsely and finely toothed along the edges,
      green and smooth on the upper surface, paler and slightly hairy on
      the lower surface; leafstalks slender, hairy, up to ¼ inch long.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately on different trees,
      appearing in April and May; both types of flowers in few-flowered
      clusters, greenish or whitish, with usually 4 small petals.

Fruit: Red or rarely orange berries, spherical, up to ¼ inch in
      diameter, remaining on the tree during the winter.

Wood: Hard, heavy, close-grained, whitish.

Use: The handsome berries make this species an attractive ornamental.

Habitat: Bottomland woods.

Range: Maryland across to eastern Kansas, south to Texas, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Swamp Holly is distinguished by its alternate,
      remotely toothed leaves clustered at the ends of spur-like shoots,
      and by its red berries.

    [Illustration: SWAMP HOLLY]


                               BUTTERNUT
                          _Juglans cinerea_ L.

Other Name: White Walnut.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 90 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      feet; crown flat to broadly rounded; trunk straight, columnar, not
      buttressed.

Bark: Light gray, divided by deep furrows into broad scaly ridges.

Twigs: Stout, greenish or orange-brown to gray, smooth or hairy, usually
      shiny, with white lenticels; pith chocolate-colored, divided by
      partitions; leaf scars alternate, shield-shaped, elevated, with 3
      bundle traces.

Buds: Blunt at the tip, whitish, hairy, soft, up to ½ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with up to 17 leaflets; leaflets
      up to 3 inches long and 2 inches wide, broadly lance-shaped,
      pointed at the tip, rounded at the asymmetrical base, finely
      toothed along the edges, yellow-green on the upper surface, paler
      on the lower surface, softly hairy and sometimes sticky.

Flowers: Borne separately but on the same tree, appearing when the
      leaves are partly grown, the staminate several in thick,
      yellow-green catkins, the pistillate much fewer in spikes, neither
      of them with petals.

Fruit: In groups of 2-5, ovoid-oblong, up to 2½ inches long,
      sticky-hairy, the husk thick, the nut pointed at one end and with
      well-developed wings, pale brown, the seed sweet.

Wood: Soft, light in weight, coarse-grained, pale brown.

Uses: Furniture, interior finishing; the nut is sought after as a
      delicacy.

Habitat: Bottomland woods.

Range: New Brunswick across to Minnesota, south to Arkansas, east to
      Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The Butternut is distinguished by its bark
      pattern, its chocolate-colored, partitioned pith, and its
      distinctive fruits.

    [Illustration: BUTTERNUT]


                              BLACK WALNUT
                           _Juglans nigra_ L.

Growth Form: Large tree up to 150 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 5
      feet; crown broadly rounded; trunk straight, columnar, not
      buttressed at the base.

Bark: Black, thick, deeply furrowed.

Twigs: Stout, greenish or orange-brown, hairy, smooth and gray; pith
      brown, divided by partitions; leaf scars alternate, shield-shaped,
      elevated, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: More or less rounded at the tip, pale brown, soft, hairy, up to ½
      inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with 15-23 leaflets; leaflets up
      to 3½ inches long and 1½ inches wide, broadly lance-shaped,
      pointed at the tip, rounded at the asymmetrical base, toothed
      along the edges, yellow-green and smooth on the upper surface,
      paler and hairy on the lower surface, turning yellow in the
      autumn.

Flowers: Borne separately but on the same tree, appearing when the
      leaves are partly grown, the staminate several in thick,
      yellow-green, hairy catkins, the pistillate much fewer in small
      spikes, neither of them with petals.

Fruit: In groups of 1 or 2, spherical, up to 2 inches in diameter, green
      or yellow-green, slightly roughened, the husk thick, the nut very
      hard, oval, dark brown, deeply ridged, the seed sweet.

Wood: Hard, heavy, coarse-grained, dark brown.

Uses: The wood is used for furniture, interior finishing, cabinets; the
      nuts are edible.

Habitat: Rich woodlands.

Range: Massachusetts across to Minnesota, south to Texas, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Black Walnut is recognized by its
      characteristic buds, its chambered pith, and its fruits.

    [Illustration: BLACK WALNUT]


                               RED CEDAR
                       _Juniperus virginiana_ L.

Other Names: Juniper; Eastern Red Cedar.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 90 feet tall, usually much smaller; trunk
      diameter up to 3 feet; crown narrowly pyramidal or broad and
      rounded.

Bark: Reddish-brown, splitting into long shreds.

Twigs: Slender, brown.

Leaves: Of 2 types, either flat, triangular, opposite, and up to ¹/₁₆
      inch long, or short and needle-like, up to ¾ inch long, blue-green
      to green to yellow-green.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate on different trees, the staminate in
      small, narrow yellowish spikes, the pistillate in small, ovoid,
      purplish clusters.

Fruit: Berry-like, spherical, up to ¼ inch in diameter, dark blue with a
      whitish covering, with sweet flesh and 1-2 seeds.

Wood: Durable, light in weight, close-grained, red, fragrant.

Uses: Clothing chests, pencils, fence posts.

Habitat: Fields, dry woods, cliffs.

Range: New Brunswick across to North Dakota, south to Texas, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The 2 kinds of leaves readily distinguish this
      species.

    [Illustration: RED CEDAR]


                             EUROPEAN LARCH
                         _Larix decidua_ Mill.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 50 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 15
      inches; crown straight and more or less columnar.

Bark: Light brown, scaly.

Twigs: Moderately stout, yellowish, with numerous conspicuous leaf scars
      or, when older, with short lateral spurs.

Leaves: Needles borne many in clusters from short spurs, or borne singly
      on new branchlets, soft, yellow-green, up to about one inch long,
      somewhat triangular, falling from the tree in the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing as the new leaves begin to appear, the staminate
      in nearly round, yellow heads, the pistillate in oblong, bright
      red “cones.”

Fruit: Cones oblong, upright, up to 1¼ inches long, containing numerous
      small, winged seeds.

Wood: Hard, heavy, strong, orange-brown.

Use: This tree is sometimes planted as an ornamental.

Habitat: Around homes where it has persisted from cultivation.

Range: Native of Europe; infrequently escaped from cultivation in
      northeastern North America.

Distinguishing Features: The European Larch differs from the American
      Larch by its slightly longer cones, its yellow-green needles, and
      its yellower twigs.

    [Illustration: EUROPEAN LARCH]


                             AMERICAN LARCH
                     _Larix laricina_ (DuRoi) Koch

Other Name: Tamarack.

Growth Form: Medium to large tree to 100 feet tall; trunk diameter up to
      1½ feet; crown narrowly pyramidal.

Bark: Reddish-brown, broken into scales.

Twigs: Slender, light brown or orange, smooth; leaf scars alternate,
      elevated, borne on spurs, with 1 bundle trace.

Buds: Spherical, reddish-brown, up to ⅛ inch in diameter.

Leaves: Needles numerous in clusters, soft, up to about 1 inch long,
      light green, falling away during the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate spherical, yellow, usually not subtended by leaves;
      pistillate oblong, rose-colored, usually subtended by leaves.

Fruit: Cones oblong, up to ½ inch long, chestnut-brown.

Wood: Heavy, hard, durable, close-grained, orange-brown.

Uses: Fence posts, railroad ties, interior finishing; sometimes grown as
      an ornamental.

Habitat: Bogs and swamps.

Range: Labrador to Alaska, south to Minnesota, northern Illinois, and
      West Virginia.

Distinguishing Features: American Larch is distinguished by its short,
      pale green needles borne many in a cluster or singly on long
      shoots.

    [Illustration: AMERICAN LARCH]


                               SWEET GUM
                      _Liquidambar styraciflua_ L.

Other Name: Red Gum.

Growth Form: Up to 100 feet tall; trunk diameter sometimes more than 3
      feet; crown usually pyramidal.

Bark: Usually dark gray and broken into scaly ridges.

Twigs: Stout, often bordered by corky wings; leaf scars alternate,
      half-elliptical, slightly elevated, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Large, shiny, pointed, sometimes sticky to the touch.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades shaped like 5- to 7-pointed stars,
      each point toothed along the edge, as much as six inches long and
      nearly as broad. In the autumn, the leaves turn a variety of
      colors, from red to yellow to purple.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate on same tree crowded together in
      rounded clusters, opening at about the same time as the leaves
      unfold.

Fruit: Dry “ball” about one inch in diameter, covered by numerous short,
      often sharp projections, with many seeds, most of which are
      incapable of germinating.

Wood: Hard, strong, durable.

Uses: Lumber, furniture, flooring. The attractive leaves make this tree
      a handsome ornamental.

Habitat: Bottomland woods.

Range: Southwestern Connecticut across southern Illinois to eastern
      Oklahoma and eastern Texas, east to central Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The star-shaped leaves readily distinguish this
      tree.

    [Illustration: SWEET GUM]


                               TULIP TREE
                      _Liriodendron tulipifera_ L.

Other Names: Yellow Poplar; Tulip Poplar.

Growth Form: Stately tree up to 100 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 4
      feet; crown oblong or pyramidal from a long, columnar trunk.

Bark: Grayish, becoming deeply furrowed at maturity; furrows often
      whitish within.

Twigs: Smooth, reddish-brown; leaf scars alternate, nearly spherical,
      with several bundle traces, with stipule scars encircling the
      twig.

Buds: Flattened, up to 1 inch long, resembling duckbills.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades divided into four broad lobes, the
      upper two lobes usually with a conspicuous notch between them,
      bright green, averaging 4 to 6 inches long and broad.

Flowers: About two inches long, cup-shaped, with six yellow-green petals
      with an orange base surrounding a cone-shaped cluster of pistils;
      opening in May.

Fruit: Dry “cones” about 2½ inches long, composed of several winged
      seeds.

Wood: Soft, durable.

Uses: Lumber, veneer cores to which other wood can be glued, canoes,
      frames.

Habitat: Rich soil.

Range: Connecticut and Vermont across to southern Michigan,
      southwestward across Illinois to Louisiana, east to Central
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The shape of the leaf is unlike that of any
      other tree in Illinois.

    [Illustration: TULIP TREE]


                              OSAGE ORANGE
                      _Maclura pomifera_ Schneid.

Other Names: Hedge Apple; Bow Wood.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 40 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1 foot;
      crown rounded or dome-shaped, with several rather stout, spreading
      branches.

Bark: Light gray-brown tinged with orange, separating into shaggy
      strips.

Twigs: Dull orange-brown, smooth, zigzag, with short, sharp, axillary
      spines; leaf scars alternate, half-round, elevated, with usually 3
      groups of bundle traces.

Buds: Round, reddish-brown, smooth, very tiny.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades ovate or ovate-lanceolate,
      long-pointed at the tip, narrowed or a little bit heart-shaped at
      the base, up to 5 inches long and 3½ inches broad, smooth along
      the edges, green and smooth on both surfaces; leafstalks smooth,
      up to 2 inches long.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne on separate trees, yellow-green,
      very tiny, the staminate crowded in short clusters on stalks up to
      4 inches long, the pistillate crowded into spherical heads on
      short, stout stalks.

Fruit: Large, spherical, greenish-yellow compound fruit up to 6 inches
      in diameter, containing many seeds, succulent flesh, and milky
      sap.

Wood: Heavy, hard, flexible, durable, coarse-grained, orange when first
      cut, becoming brown.

Uses: Bows, fence posts, railroad ties, tool handles; often planted as a
      windbreak.

Habitat: Hedge-rows, woods.

Range: Native only in Arkansas, Oklahoma, and Texas; commonly planted
      elsewhere and often escaped from cultivation.

Distinguishing Features: The Osage Orange is distinguished by its spiny
      branches, its long-pointed, toothless leaves, its milky sap, and
      its large, spherical, yellow-green fruits.

    [Illustration: OSAGE ORANGE]


                           CUCUMBER MAGNOLIA
                        _Magnolia acuminata_ L.

Other Name: Cucumber Tree.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 75 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      feet; crown broadly rounded or pyramidal.

Bark: Gray or brown, with shallow furrows when older.

Twigs: Rather stout, reddish-brown, smooth; leaf scars alternate,
      U-shaped, with several scattered bundle traces.

Buds: Silvery-white, hairy, up to nearly 1 inch long, with a single bud
      scale.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades usually elliptic, short-pointed at the
      apex, rounded or tapering to the base, up to 10 inches long and
      more than half as broad, entire along the edges, yellow-green and
      smooth on the upper surface, paler and sometimes hairy on the
      lower surface.

Flowers: Greenish-yellow, up to 3 inches long, with usually 6 elongated,
      pointed petals, appearing in April.

Fruit: Oblong fruits up to 3 inches long, deep red, with several seeds.
      Young fruits look like small cucumbers, thus accounting for the
      common name. The fruits ripen from late August to October.

Wood: Light weight, soft, pale brown.

Uses: Cabinets, flooring.

Habitat: Rich woodlands.

Range: New York to southern Illinois and Oklahoma, south to Louisiana
      and Georgia, also southern Ontario.

Distinguishing Features: The large toothless leaves are distinctive from
      leaves of all other Illinois trees except the Tupelo Gum, a tree
      of swamps which usually had 1-3 coarse teeth along the edges of
      each leaf. The silvery buds are also distinctive, as are the
      flowers and fruits.

    [Illustration: CUCUMBER MAGNOLIA]


                        NARROW-LEAVED CRAB APPLE
                   _Malus angustifolia_ (Ait.) Michx.

Growth Form: Small tree to 20 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 9 inches;
      crown spreading.

Bark: Reddish-brown, deeply furrowed, scaly.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown or pale brown, smooth, sometimes
      spur-like; leaf scars alternate, narrow, curved, with 3 bundle
      traces.

Buds: Rounded, brown, up to ¹/₁₆ inch in diameter, finely hairy.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades elliptic to oblong, rounded or pointed
      at the tip, narrowed to the base, to 2 inches long, less than half
      as broad, toothed along the edges, seldom shallowly lobed, green
      and smooth on the upper surface, a little paler and smooth or
      sparsely hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks slender, up to 1
      inch long, smooth or hairy.

Flowers: Showy, up to 1 inch across, on long stalks, usually 3 or more
      in a cluster, with 5 narrow, rose petals, appearing during May and
      June.

Fruit: Apples up to 1 inch across, yellow-green, edible.

Wood: Heavy, close-grained, brown.

Use: The fruit is used in making jelly.

Habitat: Rather moist woods.

Range: Maryland across to southern Missouri, south to Louisiana, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: This crab apple is distinguished by its narrow
      leaves which are usually unlobed.

    [Illustration: NARROW-LEAVED CRAB APPLE]


                           PRAIRIE CRAB APPLE
                      _Malus coronaria_ (L.) Mill.

Growth Form: Small tree to 25 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1 foot;
      crown widely spreading.

Bark: Gray-brown to red-brown, with rather deep furrows between the
      scales.

Twigs: Moderately stout, reddish-brown, often spurlike, sometimes spiny,
      usually smooth at maturity; leaf scars alternate, narrow, curved,
      with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded, reddish, about ¼ inch in diameter, smooth or nearly so.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades oval, rounded to short-pointed at the
      tip, rounded or tapering to the base, up to 3 inches long, about
      half as broad, toothed along the edges and sometimes slightly
      lobed, yellow-green and smooth on the upper surface, paler on the
      lower surface; leafstalks stout, up to 2 inches long, smooth or
      hairy.

Flowers: Showy, up to 1½ inches across, on long stalks, usually 3 or
      more in a cluster, with 5 rounded, white or pinkish petals,
      appearing during May and June.

Fruit: Apples up to 1 inch across, yellow-green, edible.

Wood: Heavy, close-grained, reddish-brown.

Uses: Wood is used for tool handles; crab apples used in making jelly.

Habitat: Woods; edge of fields; edge of prairies.

Range: New York and southern Ontario across to Wisconsin, south to
      Kansas, Tennessee, and North Carolina.

Distinguishing Features: The Prairie Crab Apple differs from the
      Narrow-leaved Crab Apple by its broader leaves and from the Iowa
      Crab Apple by its usually less-lobed leaves and smooth flowers.

    [Illustration: PRAIRIE CRAB APPLE]


                            IOWA CRAB APPLE
                     _Malus ioensis_ (Wood) Britt.

Growth Form: Small tree to 25 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1 foot;
      crown spreading.

Bark: Reddish-brown, scaly.

Twigs: Moderately stout, reddish-brown, sometimes spiny, usually
      somewhat hairy at maturity; leaf scars alternate, narrow, curved,
      with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded, reddish-brown, less than ⅛ inch in diameter, finely
      hairy.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades elliptic to oval, rounded or pointed
      at the tip, rounded or tapering to the base, up to 4½ inches long
      and less than half as broad, toothed along the edges and often
      shallowly lobed, dark green and smooth on the upper surface,
      yellow-green and usually somewhat hairy on the lower surface;
      leafstalks stout, up to 1 inch long, hairy.

Flowers: Showy, up to 2 inches across, on long stalks, usually 3 or more
      in a cluster, with 5 rounded, white or rose petals, appearing
      during May and June.

Fruit: Apples up to 1¾ inches across, yellow-green, edible.

Wood: Heavy, close-grained, brown.

Use: The fruit is used in making jelly.

Habitat: Edges of prairies and fields.

Range: Wisconsin and Minnesota, south to Nebraska, Texas, and Louisiana.

Distinguishing Features: The Iowa Crab Apple is distinguished from the
      other crab apples in the state by the greater frequency of lobed
      leaves and by its hairy flowers.

    [Illustration: IOWA CRAB APPLE]


                             WHITE MULBERRY
                            _Morus alba_ L.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 50 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2
      feet; crown broadly rounded, with many short branchlets.

Bark: Light brown, sometimes tinted with orange, divided into long,
      scaly plates.

Twigs: Slender, yellowish, smooth or sometimes hairy, more or less
      zigzag; leaf scars alternate, half-round, elevated, with numerous
      bundle traces.

Buds: Pointed, reddish-brown, smooth, about ⅙ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades ovate, short-pointed at the tip,
      rounded or cut straight across at the base, up to 5 inches long
      and nearly as broad, coarsely round-toothed, sometimes 2-lobed,
      sometimes 3-lobed, sometimes deeply several-lobed, sometimes
      unlobed, green and smooth to the touch on the upper surface, paler
      and smooth on the lower surface, except for a few hairs sometimes
      on the veins; leafstalks up to 2 inches long, smooth.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne separately, either on
      the same tree or on different trees, appearing as the leaves
      unfold, the staminate crowded into narrow green clusters up to 2
      inches long, the pistillate crowded into short, thick spikes up to
      1 inch long.

Fruit: A cluster of tiny drupes up to 1¼ inches long, white or pinkish,
      more rarely red or purple, sweet, juicy.

Wood: Light in weight, soft, coarse-grained, orange-brown.

Uses: Fence posts; the fruit is edible.

Habitat: Woods, along roads, in disturbed areas.

Range: Native of Asia; naturalized from Maine to Minnesota, south to
      Texas, east to Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The White Mulberry lacks hairs on the lower
      surface of the leaves (except sometimes along the veins), thus
      differing from the Red Mulberry.

    [Illustration: WHITE MULBERRY]


                              RED MULBERRY
                            _Morus rubra_ L.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 50 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2
      feet; crown broadly rounded, with many short branchlets.

Bark: Dark brown, divided into long, scaly plates.

Twigs: Slender, smooth or sometimes hairy, reddish-brown to dark brown,
      more or less zigzag; leaf scars alternate, half-round, elevated,
      with numerous bundle traces.

Buds: Pointed, brown, smooth, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades mostly ovate, abruptly pointed at the
      apex, more or less heart-shaped at the base, up to 6 inches long
      and sometimes nearly as broad, coarsely toothed, sometimes
      2-lobed, sometimes 3-lobed, often unlobed, green and usually rough
      to the touch on the upper surface, paler and with short white
      hairs on the lower surface; leafstalks up to 1½ inches long,
      smooth at maturity. The leaves turn yellow in the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne separately, either on
      the same tree or on different trees, appearing as the leaves
      unfold, the staminate crowded into narrow, green clusters up to 2
      inches long, the pistillate crowded into short, thick spikes up to
      1 inch long.

Fruit: A cluster of tiny drupes up to 1½ inches long, at first red,
      becoming purple or nearly black, rarely remaining pale, sweet,
      juicy.

Wood: Light in weight, soft, durable, coarse-grained, orange-brown.

Uses: Fence posts and barrels; the fruit is edible.

Habitat: Woods, particularly along streams.

Range: Vermont across to Minnesota and South Dakota, south to Texas,
      east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Red Mulberry differs from White Mulberry in the
      presence of some hairs on the lower surface of the leaves.

    [Illustration: RED MULBERRY]


                               TUPELO GUM
                          _Nyssa aquatica_ L.

Other Names: Swamp Tupelo; Water Tupelo; Cotton Gum.

Growth Form: Large tree up to 85 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 4 feet,
      often swollen at the base; crown spreading, with numerous
      branchlets.

Bark: Light gray to dark gray to brown, broken into thin scales.

Twigs: Stout, more or less angular, gray or brown, smooth; leaf scars
      alternate, broadly U-shaped, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded, smooth, about ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades oblong to somewhat ovate, pointed at
      the tip, tapering to rounded to even heart-shaped at the base, up
      to 8 inches long and about half as broad, the edges smooth or with
      a few coarse teeth, dark green, shiny, smooth or somewhat hairy on
      the upper surface, paler and soft-hairy on the lower surface;
      leafstalks stout, up to 3 inches long, hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne on separate trees, appearing as
      the leaves begin to unfold, greenish, small, the staminate several
      in spherical clusters, the pistillate solitary on long stalks
      arising from the leaf axils.

Fruit: Fleshy, oblong, dark purple with pale speckles, up to 1 inch
      long, bitter, 1-seeded, ripening in September.

Wood: Light in weight, soft, close-grained, pale brown.

Uses: Paper pulp, broom handles, floors.

Habitat: Swamps and low woods.

Range: Virginia to southern Missouri, south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Tupelo Gum is characterized by its large,
      irregularly toothed leaves and its oblong, purple fruits.

    [Illustration: TUPELO GUM]


                                SOUR GUM
                        _Nyssa sylvatica_ Marsh.

Other Name: Black Gum.

Growth Form: Medium to large tree to 75 feet tall; trunk diameter up to
      3 feet; crown rounded, often with many small, drooping branchlets.

Bark: Brown to black, often broken up into squarish blocks.

Twigs: Rather stout, reddish-brown, smooth, sometimes zigzag; leaf scars
      alternate, crescent-shaped, with 3 bundle traces. The pith is
      continuous but marked with distinct partitions.

Buds: Short-pointed, yellowish or reddish, smooth, about ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades abruptly pointed at the tip, tapering
      or rounded at the base, up to 6 inches long and usually about half
      as wide, smooth or with a few coarse teeth along the edges, dark
      green, shiny, and usually smooth on the upper surface, paler and
      usually somewhat hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks up to 1½
      inches long, smooth or sparsely hairy. The leaves turn scarlet in
      the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne on separate trees, appearing
      after the leaves begin to unfold, greenish, very small, the
      staminate several in spherical clusters, the pistillate 2-several
      on long stalks arising from the leaf axils.

Fruit: Fleshy, oval, dark blue, up to ⅔ inch long, bitter, 1-seeded,
      ripening in October.

Wood: Heavy, strong, soft, not durable, pale yellow.

Uses: Pulpwood, gun-stocks, flooring; sometimes used as an ornamental.

Habitat: Dry wooded slopes, low woods.

Range: Maine across to Michigan and Wisconsin, south to Missouri and
      Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Sour Gum is easily confused with Persimmon, but
      differs by its leaves which are abruptly short-pointed at the tip,
      and by its twigs which have continuous pith marked by distinct
      partitions.

    [Illustration: SOUR GUM]


                              HOP HORNBEAM
                  _Ostrya virginiana_ (Mill.) K. Koch

Other Name: Ironwood.

Growth Form: Small tree up to 35 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1 foot;
      crown usually rounded.

Bark: Brown and scaly at maturity.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown, sometimes hairy, tough to break; leaf
      scars alternate, crescent-shaped, slightly elevated, with 3 bundle
      traces.

Buds: Small, pointed at the tip.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades elliptic to ovate, pointed at the tip,
      rounded or tapering to the base, up to 5 inches long, finely
      doubly toothed, green and usually smooth on the upper surface,
      paler and usually slightly hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks
      up to ¼ inch long, hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately but on the same tree.
      The staminate catkins are on the tree through the winter before
      opening in late April or May.

Fruit: Nutlets enclosed by an inflated bladder, crowded together in a
      cluster resembling hops.

Wood: Hard, strong, durable.

Use: Tool handles.

Habitat: Upland woods; rocky slopes; along streams.

Range: Nova Scotia across to Manitoba and northeastern Wyoming, south to
      eastern Texas and northern Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Blue Beech, with similar leaves, differs by
      its scaly bark. Elms, which also have somewhat similar leaves,
      usually have their leaves asymmetrical at the base.

    [Illustration: HOP HORNBEAM]


                             PRINCESS TREE
                 _Paulownia tomentosa_ (Thunb.) Steud.

Other Name: Paulownia.

Growth Form: Small to medium tree to 45 feet tall; trunk diameter up to
      1½ feet; crown rounded.

Bark: Gray, more or less smooth.

Twigs: Stout, grayish, finely hairy; leaf scars opposite, nearly
      spherical but with a notch at the top, with many bundle traces in
      a ring.

Buds: Half-round, minutely hairy.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades mostly heart-shaped, tapering to a
      short point at the tip, up to about 10 inches long and nearly as
      broad, smooth along the edges, minutely hairy on both surfaces.

Flowers: Large, showy, fragrant, several in a large cluster, appearing
      in late April or early May, the clusters sometimes a foot long,
      each flower up to 2 inches long, the petals violet with yellow
      stripes.

Fruit: Ovoid capsules up to 1½ inches long, pointed at the tip, brown,
      containing numerous winged seeds.

Use: Popular as an ornamental because of its handsome flowers.

Habitat: Along roads, around home sites.

Range: Native of Asia; occasionally escaped in the eastern United
      States.

Distinguishing Features: The leaves of the Princess Tree resemble those
      of the Catalpa, but they are always opposite and never in whorls.
      The violet flowers and the short, ovid capsules further
      distinguish the Princess Tree.

    [Illustration: PRINCESS TREE]


                               JACK PINE
                        _Pinus banksiana_ Lamb.

Other Names: Gray Pine; Scrub Pine.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 75 feet tall in some parts of the United
      States; trunk diameter up to 2½ feet; crown open but often
      irregular.

Bark: Reddish-brown, rough and scaly.

Twigs: Slender, dark brown, becoming roughened.

Leaves: Needles in clusters of 2, stiff, curved, up to 1½ inches long,
      dark green.

Flowers: Staminate crowded into several yellow spikes up to ½ inch long;
      pistillate crowded into few to several purple clusters.

Fruit: Cones oblong, curved, upright, up to 2 inches long, each scale
      comprising the cone bearing a small curved prickle; seeds
      triangular, up to ¹/₁₂ inch long, with a wing up to ⅓ inch long.

Wood: Light in weight, soft, reddish-brown.

Uses: Railroad ties, fence posts, fuel, pulpwood.

Habitat: Rocky woods.

Range: Quebec across to Yukon, south to Minnesota, northern Illinois,
      and New York, Nova Scotia.

Distinguishing Features: The Jack Pine is distinguished by its short,
      stiff, curved needles in clusters of 2 and by its short, curved
      cones.

    [Illustration: JACK PINE]


                             SHORTLEAF PINE
                         _Pinus echinata_ Mill.

Other Name: Yellow Pine.

Growth Form: Large tree to 80 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2 feet;
      crown pyramidal or rounded.

Bark: Reddish-brown, broken into large plates.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown, becoming shreddy.

Leaves: Needles in clusters of both 2 and 3 on the same tree, flexible,
      up to 5 inches long, dark green.

Flowers: Staminate crowded into several pale purple spikes up to ¾ inch
      long; pistillate in groups of 1-3, rose-colored.

Fruit: Cones 1-3 in a group, ovoid, up to 2½ inches long, each scale
      comprising the cone often bearing a small sharp prickle on the
      back; seeds triangular; less than ¼ inch long, with an
      asymmetrical curved wing up to ½ inch long.

Wood: Hard, heavy, coarse-grained, reddish-brown.

Uses: Interior finishing, paper pulp, construction.

Habitat: Dry, rocky slopes; widely planted in a variety of sites.

Range: Southern New York across Pennsylvania and southern Illinois to
      Oklahoma, south to Texas, east to northern Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Shortleaf Pine is distinguished by its needles
      which may be in clusters of 2 and 3 on the same tree.

    [Illustration: SHORTLEAF PINE]


                                RED PINE
                         _Pinus resinosa_ Ait.

Growth Form: Medium to large tree to 150 feet tall; trunk diameter up to
      3 feet; crown pyramidal.

Bark: Reddish-brown, divided irregularly into plates.

Twigs: Stout, reddish-brown, becoming roughened.

Leaves: Needles in clusters of 2, flexible, up to 6 inches long, dark
      green.

Flowers: Staminate crowded into several purple spikes up to ½ inch long;
      pistillate crowded into fewer scarlet clusters.

Fruit: Cones ovoid, mostly straight, up to 2 inches long, each scale
      comprising the cone without any prickles; seeds triangular, up to
      ⅛ inch long, with a wing up to ¾ inch long.

Wood: Rather hard, heavy, close-grained, reddish-brown.

Uses: Ships, bridges, general construction.

Habitat: Dry, rocky woods.

Range: Newfoundland across to Manitoba, south to Minnesota, Michigan,
      Pennsylvania, and New Jersey; also north-central Illinois and West
      Virginia.

Distinguishing Features: The Red Pine is distinguished by its dark green
      needles usually clustered near the tips of the twigs.

    [Illustration: RED PINE]


                               WHITE PINE
                           _Pinus strobus_ L.

Growth Form: Tall tree well over 100 feet tall in some regions of the
      United States; trunk diameter sometimes in excess of 3 feet; crown
      pyramidal.

Bark: Brown, divided into broad ridges by shallow fissures.

Twigs: Slender, orange-brown, smooth or slightly hairy.

Leaves: Needles in clusters of 5, very flexible, up to 5 inches long,
      blue-green.

Flowers: Staminate crowded into several yellow spikes up to ⅓ inch long;
      pistillate crowded into fewer groups, pink to purple.

Fruit: Cones oblong, curved, drooping, up to 8 inches long, each scale
      comprising the cone lacking any prickles; seeds narrowly oblong,
      up to ¼ inch long, with a wing up to ¾ inch long.

Wood: Light in weight, soft, light brown.

Uses: Interior finishing, construction.

Habitat: Moist woods, wooded slopes.

Range: Newfoundland across to Manitoba, south to Iowa, northern
      Illinois, and in the Appalachian Mountains to northern Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The soft, blue-green needles in clusters of 5
      readily distinguish the White Pine.

    [Illustration: WHITE PINE]


                              SCOTCH PINE
                         _Pinus sylvestris_ L.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 65 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2 feet;
      crown irregular.

Bark: Large branches reddish-brown, broken into plates.

Twigs: Slender, brown, roughened.

Leaves: Needles in clusters of 2, stiff, to 3 inches long, gray-green.

Flowers: Staminate crowded into several yellow spikes up to ½ inch long;
      pistillate crowded into 1 to several clusters.

Fruit: Cones narrowly ovoid, to 2½ inches long, each scale comprising
      the cone without any prickles.

Uses: Often planted as an ornamental, Christmas trees.

Habitat: Planted in plantations in Illinois, rarely escaped.

Range: Native of Europe; widely planted in the eastern United States.

Distinguishing Features: The rather short, stiff, gray-green needles in
      clusters of 2 distinguish this pine.

    [Illustration: SCOTCH PINE]


                             LOBLOLLY PINE
                            _Pinus taeda_ L.

Other Name: Old-field Pine.

Growth Form: Large tree sometimes over 125 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to 2 feet; crown rounded.

Bark: Reddish-brown, divided into irregular plates.

Twigs: Slender, brown, becoming roughened.

Leaves: Needles in clusters of 3 or occasionally 2, stiff, up to 9
      inches long, light green.

Flowers: Staminate crowded into several yellow spikes up to ½ inch long;
      pistillate crowded into 1 to several yellow clusters.

Fruit: Cones ovoid to oblong, mostly straight, up to 6 inches long, each
      scale comprising the cone with a short, sharp prickle; seeds
      rounded, up to ¼ inch long, with a wing up to 1 inch long.

Wood: Weak, brittle, coarse-grained, yellow-brown.

Uses: Pulpwood, construction.

Habitat: Planted in plantations in Illinois, rarely escaped.

Range: New Jersey to Tennessee, south across Arkansas to eastern Texas,
      east to central Florida; not native in Illinois.

Distinguishing Features: The Loblolly Pine is distinguished by its
      stiff, long needles usually in clusters of 3 and by its long
      cones. It is similar to Shortleaf Pine but has longer needles and
      cones.

    [Illustration: LOBLOLLY PINE]


                               WATER ELM
                        _Planera aquatica_ Gmel.

Other Name: Planer-tree.

Growth Form: Small tree to 30 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 10 inches;
      crown broadly rounded, with slender branchlets.

Bark: Gray or pale brown, smooth at first but later splitting into large
      scales.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown to gray, usually smooth; leaf scars
      alternate, nearly circular, each with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Slender, pointed, brownish, smooth or somewhat hairy, up to ¼ inch
      long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades lance-ovate, rounded or somewhat
      pointed at the tip, tapering to the usually asymmetrical base, up
      to 3 inches long, less than half as broad, regularly coarsely
      toothed, smooth or a little roughened on the upper surface at
      maturity, smooth or hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks up to ½
      inch long, finely hairy.

Flowers: Of three kinds, all on the same tree, appearing after the
      leaves have begun to expand, greenish-yellow, without petals, the
      staminate in several small clusters, the pistillate and perfect in
      drooping clusters of 1-3 flowers.

Fruit: Oblong, fleshy, up to ½ inch long, with warts irregularly
      scattered over the surface, pale brown.

Wood: Soft, light in weight, close-grained, pale brown.

Uses: Fence posts, fuel.

Habitat: Swampy areas.

Range: North Carolina across southern Illinois to southeastern Missouri,
      south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Water Elm resembles other native elms in
      Illinois, but has only single-toothed leaves. The warty fruits are
      also distinctive.

    [Illustration: WATER ELM]


                                SYCAMORE
                       _Platanus occidentalis_ L.

Other Names: Buttonwood; Plane-tree.

Growth Form: Large tree sometimes more than 100 feet tall; trunk
      diameter up to 8 feet; crown broad, often irregular.

Bark: Reddish-brown when young, quickly breaking into thin, flat scales,
      falling away in sections to expose large patches of whitish or
      greenish inner bark.

Twigs: Smooth, light brown, somewhat zigzag; leaf scars alternate,
      encircling the buds, somewhat elevated, with 5-7 bundle traces.

Buds: Light brown, pointed, about one-fourth inch long, entirely covered
      by the base of the leafstalk. When the leaves fall off, exposing
      the buds, they leave a scar which surrounds the base of each bud.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades circular in outline but divided into 3
      or 5 shallow, sharp-pointed lobes, heart-shaped or cut straight
      across at the base, up to 7 inches long (longer on vigorous
      shoots) and often as broad, bright green and smooth on the upper
      surface, paler and smooth on the lower surface except for the
      sparsely hairy veins; leafstalks to 5 inches long, slightly hairy;
      stipules, resembling the leaves but only about an inch long, often
      persist near the base of the leafstalks.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne separately but on the
      same tree, minute, crowded together in dense, round heads.

Fruit: Round light brown heads, about one inch in diameter, on long
      drooping stalks, containing many small seeds surrounded by hairs.

Wood: Hard and strong.

Uses: Furniture, interior finishing. Sometimes planted as an ornamental
      because of its rapid growth and unusual bark.

Habitat: Bottomlands, along streams, around lakes and ponds.

Range: Maine across southern Wisconsin to eastern Nebraska, south to
      eastern Texas, east to northern Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The large palmately lobed leaves and the brown
      and gray mottled bark readily distinguish this tree.

    [Illustration: SYCAMORE]


                              WHITE POPLAR
                           _Populus alba_ L.

Other Names: Silver-leaved Poplar; Abele.

Growth Form: Moderate tree to 50 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2 feet;
      crown broadly rounded but often irregular.

Bark: Grayish to whitish, at first smooth, later becoming deeply
      fissured and very dark gray to nearly black.

Twigs: Greenish-gray, white-hairy at least when young; leaf scars
      alternate, crescent-shaped, each with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, hairy, up to ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades usually ovate, with a few broad teeth
      along the edges, bluntly pointed at the tip, cut straight across
      or a little heart-shaped at the base, up to 4 inches long, dark
      green on the upper surface, silvery-hairy or white-wooly on the
      lower surface; leafstalks up to 3 inches long, densely hairy, not
      flat.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne on separate trees, crowded
      together in catkins, appearing when the leaves unfold.

Fruit: Often curved, flask-shaped capsules, greenish, hairy, up to ¼
      inch long, containing many seeds with cottony hairs attached.

Wood: Light weight, soft.

Use: Grown as an ornamental because of its silvery leaves.

Habitat: Along roads, around old homesteads.

Range: Native of Europe and Asia; frequently planted and escaped from
      cultivation in the United States.

Distinguishing Features: The leaves, with their silvery or white-wooly
      under-surface and their few broad teeth, provided the best means
      of identifying this tree.

    [Illustration: WHITE POPLAR]


                               COTTONWOOD
                       _Populus deltoides_ Marsh.

Growth Form: Large rapidly growing tree up to 100 feet tall; trunk
      diameter up to eight feet; crown spreading or broadly rounded,
      with some drooping branches. The largest tree in Illinois, in
      Grundy County, is a Cottonwood measuring twenty-eight feet six
      inches in circumference.

Bark: Smooth and gray when young, becoming furrowed at maturity.

Twigs: Yellow-green, gray, or tan, smooth, moderately stout, with
      numerous pale “dots”; leaf scars alternate, triangular, with 3
      large bundle traces.

Buds: Lance-shaped, long-pointed, up to ½ inch long, sticky,
      chestnut-colored.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades to 5 inches long and often nearly as
      broad, triangular, abruptly pointed at the tip, cut straight
      across or even slightly heart-shaped at the base, with coarse
      rounded teeth along the edges, green, smooth, and shiny on the
      upper surface, paler on the lower surface; leafstalks to 4 inches
      long, smooth, often yellow, flat.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne on separate trees, the staminate
      crowded in rather thick, reddish catkins, the pistillate crowded
      in narrower, greenish-yellow catkins, both sexes appearing before
      the leaves begin to unfold.

Fruit: Elliptic, greenish-brown capsules up to ¼ inch long, grouped in
      elongated clusters, containing numerous seeds with cottony hairs
      attached.

Wood: Light weight, soft, readily warping.

Uses: Pulpwood, fuel.

Habitat: Bottomland woods, along streams.

Range: New Hampshire across to southeastern North Dakota, south central
      Texas, east to northern Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Cottonwood is easily recognized by its
      triangular leaves with flattened leafstalks. The cottony seeds,
      when the fruits are mature, are also distinctive.

    [Illustration: COTTONWOOD]


                            BIG-TOOTH ASPEN
                     _Populus grandidentata_ Michx.

Other Name: Large-tooth Aspen.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 60 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1½ feet;
      crown rounded.

Bark: Grayish-green, smooth at first, becoming shallowly fissured and
      broken up into thin scales.

Twigs: Grayish-green, with numerous orange “dots,” hairy when young but
      becoming smooth; leaf scars alternate, raised, 3-lobed, each with
      3 bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, chestnut-brown, somewhat hairy, up to one-eighth
      inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades nearly circular in outline,
      short-pointed at the tip, rounded at the base, up to 5 inches
      long, nearly as broad, with several rather coarse teeth along the
      edges, green on the upper surface, paler on the lower surface,
      smooth when mature; leafstalks up to 3 inches long, flat, enabling
      the leaf to rustle even in gentle breezes.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne on separate trees, crowded
      together in catkins up to 5 inches long, appearing as the leaves
      unfold.

Fruit: Long, narrow, flask-shaped, green, slightly hairy capsules,
      grouped in elongated clusters, containing many seeds with cottony
      hairs attached.

Wood: Light weight, soft, pale brown.

Use: Pulpwood.

Habitat: Wooded slopes, edges of woods.

Range: Quebec across to Manitoba, south to central Illinois, east to
      Maryland; Kentucky and north-central Tennessee east to western
      North Carolina.

Distinguishing Features: The coarsely toothed, tremoring leaves and the
      grayish-green trunks combine to make this a tree easy to
      recognize.

    [Illustration: BIG-TOOTH ASPEN]


                            SWAMP COTTONWOOD
                       _Populus heterophylla_ L.

Other Name: Swamp Poplar.

Growth Form: Up to 90 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2 feet; crown very
      irregular, with a few, large, upright branches.

Bark: Gray or brown, smooth when young, becoming scaly ridged at
      maturity.

Twigs: Rather stout, smooth or hairy, reddish; leaf scars alternate,
      3-lobed, each with 3 bundle traces; pith 5-angled.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, dark brown, sticky, up to one-half inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades ovate, rounded or bluntly pointed at
      the tip, heart-shaped at the base, up to 8 inches long, up to 6
      inches broad, with rounded teeth along the edges, green on the
      upper surface, paler on the lower surface, densely white-woolly
      when young, becoming essentially smooth at maturity; leafstalks to
      4 inches long, smooth or sparsely hairy, not flattened.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne on separate trees, the staminate
      crowded in thick catkins up to 4 inches long, the pistillate in
      slender catkins up to 6 inches long, both appearing before the
      leaves begin to unfold.

Fruit: Ovoid, reddish-brown capsules up to ½ inch long, grouped in
      elongated clusters, containing numerous seeds with cottony hairs
      attached.

Wood: Light weight, soft, pale brown.

Uses: Pulpwood, fuel, interior finishing.

Habitat: Swamps, low woods.

Range: Connecticut to southern Michigan, southwestward across southern
      Illinois to central Louisiana, east to northern Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The broad, heart-shaped, toothed leaves readily
      distinguish the Swamp Cottonwood from other trees in Illinois.

    [Illustration: SWAMP COTTONWOOD]


                             QUAKING ASPEN
                      _Populus tremuloides_ Michx.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 50 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2
      feet; crown rounded or occasionally spreading.

Bark: Pale yellow-green or white, becoming grayish and divided into dark
      scaly ridges at maturity.

Twigs: Pale yellow-green or white, slender, smooth; leaf scars
      alternate, crescent-shaped, each with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Lance-shaped, short-pointed, smooth, sticky, up to ⅓ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades ovate to nearly round, short-pointed
      at the apex, rounded at the base, up to 4 inches long, nearly as
      broad, with many small round teeth along the edges, green, smooth,
      and shiny on the upper surface, not shiny on the lower surface;
      leafstalks to 3 inches long, smooth, flat. The flat leafstalks
      allow for the leaves to tremor at the slightest wind.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne on separate trees, the staminate
      crowded in catkins up to 4 inches long, the pistillate crowded in
      catkins up to 6 inches long.

Fruit: Narrow, flask-shaped, green capsules up to ¼ inch long, grouped
      in elongated clusters, containing numerous seeds with cottony
      hairs attached.

Wood: Light weight, soft, pale brown.

Use: Pulpwood.

Habitat: Edge of woods, thickets.

Range: Newfoundland to Alaska, south to California and New Mexico and
      Texas, east across Missouri and Tennessee to New Jersey.

Distinguishing Features: The whitish trunk and the ovate, trembling
      leaves serve to distinguish this species.

    [Illustration: QUAKING ASPEN]


                               WILD PLUM
                       _Prunus americana_ Marsh.

Other Name: American Plum.

Growth Form: Small tree to 20 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 8 inches;
      crown broad, often irregular.

Bark: Dark gray to brown, rough and scaly.

Twigs: Slender, brown, speckled with many dots, smooth or hairy; leaf
      scars alternate, half-round, elevated, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, reddish-brown, smooth or hairy, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades oval to ovate, pointed at the tip,
      rounded or tapering to the base, up to 4 inches long and less than
      half as broad, finely toothed along the edges, the teeth not
      glandular, green and smooth or hairy on the upper surface, paler
      and smooth or hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks slender, up
      to 1 inch long, sometimes with 1 or 2 glands near the upper end,
      smooth or hairy.

Flowers: Showy, several in a cluster, up to 1 inch across, with 5 white
      or pinkish petals, appearing before or as the leaves begin to
      unfold.

Fruit: Spherical or nearly so, up to 1 inch in diameter, red or covered
      with a whitish wax, juicy, sweet, 1-seeded.

Wood: Hard, close-grained, brown.

Uses: The fruits are used in making jelly and preserves.

Habitat: Woods, thickets.

Range: Southern Ontario to Manitoba, south to New Mexico, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Wild Plum differs from other plums in
      Illinois by the absence of glands on the teeth of the leaves. The
      Wild Plum may have either smooth or hairy leaves and twigs.

    [Illustration: WILD PLUM]


                            WILD GOOSE PLUM
                       _Prunus hortulana_ Bailey

Growth Form: Small tree to 20 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 8 inches;
      crown broad and rounded.

Bark: Gray or brown, becoming scaly at maturity.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown, smooth; leaf scars alternate, half-round,
      elevated, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, rounded at the tip, reddish-brown, smooth, up to ¼ inch
      long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades oblong to oval, pointed at the tip,
      rounded or tapering to the base, up to 6 inches long and about ⅓
      as broad, finely toothed along the edge, the teeth gland-tipped,
      green and usually smooth on the upper surface, paler and sometimes
      hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks slender, up to 1 inch long,
      with 1-several glands, smooth or sparsely hairy.

Flowers: Showy, several in a cluster, up to 1 inch across, with 5 white
      petals, appearing after the leaves are partly grown.

Fruit: Spherical or nearly so, up to 1 inch in diameter, red or rarely
      yellowish, fleshy but hard, bitter, 1-seeded.

Wood: Hard, close-grained, brown.

Habitat: Edges of woods, thickets.

Range: Indiana to Iowa, south to Oklahoma, east to Alabama.

Distinguishing Features: Wild Goose Plum flowers when its leaves are
      partly grown, thereby distinguishing it from the Wild Plum which
      blooms before or as the leaves begin to unfold.

    [Illustration: WILD GOOSE PLUM]


                            OTHER WILD PLUMS

Two other wild plums are occasionally encountered in Illinois.

Munson’s Wild Plum (_Prunus munsoniana_ Wight & Hedrick). Munson’s Wild
Plum is a small tree rarely more than 15 feet tall and often forming
thickets. It has gray or brown scaly bark, smooth brownish twigs, and
small, ovoid buds. The leaves are oval and up to 6 inches long and up to
2 inches wide. The edges of the leaves are finely toothed, with each
tooth gland-tipped. The upper surface of the leaf is smooth, while the
lower surface usually has some hairs. The showy white flowers appear
while the leaves are developing. The fruits are spherical or slightly
oblong red plums with sweet, juicy flesh. Munson’s Wild Plum is found
only in the midwestern states.

Narrow-leaved Plum (_Prunus angustifolia_ Marsh.). Also known as
Chickasaw Plum, this is a small tree up to about 15 feet tall, usually
forming thickets. The smooth, brownish twigs usually have several sharp
spines. Most of the leaves are lance-shaped and up to 2 inches long, and
conspicuously folded lengthwise. The flowers begin to bloom just as the
leaves start to unfold. The red, nearly spherical plum has tart, juicy
flesh. The Narrow-leaved Plum is found mostly in the southeastern United
States.

    [Illustration: ANOTHER WILD PLUM]


                           WILD BLACK CHERRY
                        _Prunus serotina_ Ehrh.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 75 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      feet; crown rounded, with rigid branches.

Bark: Thin, smooth, reddish-brown at first, becoming deeply furrowed and
      black.

Twigs: Slender, smooth, dark brown; leaf scars half-round, each with 3
      bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, sharp-pointed, dark brown, smooth, up to one-fourth inch
      long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades oblong or oval, short-pointed at the
      tip, tapering to the base, up to 6 inches long and about ⅓ as
      broad, finely toothed along the edges, green, smooth, and shiny on
      the upper surface, paler and smooth on the lower surface except
      for rusty hairs along the veins; leafstalks slender, slightly less
      than 1 inch long, smooth, with 1 or more reddish glands near the
      tip.

Flowers: Crowded in showy, drooping, elongated clusters up to 6 inches
      long, appearing when the leaves are partly grown, each flower
      about ¼ inch across, with 5 white petals.

Fruit: Fleshy, juicy, spherical, dark purple, up to ½ inch in diameter.

Wood: Light weight, hard, strong, close-grained, light reddish-brown.

Uses: Cabinets, interior finishing.

Habitat: Roadsides, fencerows, edge of woods.

Range: Nova Scotia across to Ontario, south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Wild Black Cherry is similar to the Choke
      Cherry but usually is a larger tree with thicker leaves and with
      the teeth tending to curve inward.

    [Illustration: WILD BLACK CHERRY]


                              CHOKE CHERRY
                         _Prunus virginiana_ L.

Growth Form: Small tree to 20 feet tall, often only a shrub; trunk
      diameter up to 5 inches; crown irregular.

Bark: Thin, smooth and reddish-brown at first, becoming furrowed and
      darkened.

Twigs: Slender, smooth, reddish-brown with pale lenticels; leaf scars
      alternate, half-round, each with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, brown, more or less smooth, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades oblong or oval, short-pointed at the
      tip, tapering to the base, up to 4 inches long and about half as
      broad, finely and sharply toothed along the edges, green, smooth
      and shiny on the upper surface, paler and smooth or with a few
      hairs on the lower surface; leafstalks slender, up to 1 inch long,
      smooth, with 2 glands near the tip.

Flowers: Crowded in showy, drooping, elongated clusters up to 6 inches
      long, appearing when the leaves are partly grown, each flower up
      to ½ inch across, with 5 white petals.

Fruit: Fleshy, juicy, spherical, up to ⅓ inch in diameter, red at first,
      becoming deep purple at maturity.

Wood: Heavy, hard, not strong, close-grained, pale-brown.

Uses: Fuel, some interior finishing.

Habitat: Woods, along streams.

Range: Newfoundland across to Saskatchewan, south to Kansas, east to
      North Carolina.

Distinguishing Features: Choke Cherry resembles Wild Black Cherry,
      differing by its more pointed teeth along the edges of the leaves.

    [Illustration: CHOKE CHERRY]


                               WAFER ASH
                         _Ptelea trifoliata_ L.

Other Name: Hop-tree.

Growth Form: Small tree or shrub up to 20 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to 5 inches; crown rounded.

Bark: Brown, somewhat roughened.

Twigs: Slender, dark brown, often with small “warts”; leaf scars
      alternate, large, horseshoe-shaped, slightly elevated, with 3
      bundle traces.

Buds: Spherical, pale brown, hairy.

Leaves: Alternate, divided into 3 leaflets; leaflets mostly ovate,
      long-pointed at the tip, rounded or tapering to the base, up to 5
      inches long, up to half as wide, smooth or with fine teeth along
      the edges, dark green and smooth on the upper surface, paler and
      smooth on the lower surface; leaflets without individual stalks.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne separately but usually
      in the same cluster, appearing in late May and June, with 3-5
      obscure, greenish-white petals.

Fruit: Thin, flat, nearly spherical winged seed up to 1 inch across.

Wood: Hard, heavy, close-grained, yellow-brown.

Use: The fruit at one time was used as a substitute for hops in brewing.

Habitat: Rocky, wooded slopes.

Range: Quebec across Michigan to Iowa, south to eastern Texas, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Wafer Ash is distinguished by its 3-parted
      alternate leaves and its flat, spherical, winged seeds.

    [Illustration: WAFER ASH]


                               WHITE OAK
                           _Quercus alba_ L.

Growth Form: Large tree up to 100 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      feet; crown very broad, with stiff, horizontal branches; trunk
      relatively short and rather thick.

Bark: Gray or whitish with gray patches, shallowly furrowed.

Twigs: Slender, smooth, somewhat shiny, gray, whitish, or even purplish;
      pith star-shaped in cross-section; leaf scars alternate but
      crowded near the tip of the twig, half-round, slightly elevated,
      with several bundle traces.

Buds: Nearly round, reddish-brown or gray, up to ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades usually with 7 or 9 lobes, the lobes
      rounded and not bristle-tipped, the sinuses varying from shallow
      to deep, the upper surface green and smooth, the lower surface
      paler and smooth, up to 10 inches long, up to half as wide,
      turning red in the autumn; leafstalks up to 1 inch long, rather
      stout, smooth. Leaves on the same tree may vary considerably.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing when the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate many in drooping, yellow catkins, the
      pistillate few in a group, red.

Fruit: Acorns borne 1 or 2 together, with or without a stalk, the nut
      oblong, up to ¾ inch long, green to greenish-brown, shiny, the cup
      covering up to ¼ of the nut, yellow-brown, often minutely hairy.

Wood: Heavy, hard, strong, durable, coarse-grained, pale brown.

Uses: Interior finishing, cabinets, general construction, fence posts,
      fuel, tight cooperage.

Habitat: Moist woods; wooded slopes; dry woods.

Range: Maine across to Minnesota, south to eastern Texas, east to
      northern Florida.

Distinguishing Features: White Oak is recognized by its grayish bark and
      its 5-7 round-lobed, smooth leaves which are usually whitish on
      the lower surface. Its oblong, greenish-brown, shiny acorns are
      also distinctive.

    [Illustration: WHITE OAK]


                            SWAMP WHITE OAK
                        _Quercus bicolor_ Willd.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 70 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3 feet;
      crown rounded and broad.

Bark: Grayish-brown, deeply furrowed, becoming flaky.

Twigs: Stout, grayish-brown to yellowish-brown; leaf scars alternate,
      half-round, slightly elevated, with several bundle traces; pith
      star-shaped in cross-section.

Buds: Clustered at the tips of the twigs, ellipsoid to spherical, up to
      ⅛ inch long, yellow-brown, smooth or with a few hairs at the tip.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades usually broadest above the middle, up
      to 6 inches long and 4 inches broad, coarsely round-toothed or
      sometimes with a few shallow lobes, smooth or somewhat hairy on
      the upper surface, white and softly hairy on the lower surface;
      leafstalks nearly an inch long, smooth or slightly hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing when the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate in slender, drooping catkins, the pistillate
      in groups of 2-4.

Fruit: Acorns in pairs, on stalks 1 inch long or longer, the nut ovoid,
      pale brown, 1-1½ inches long, enclosed about ⅓ its length by the
      cup, the cup thick, light brown, hairy, roughened.

Wood: Hard, heavy, strong, pale brown.

Uses: Interior finishing, cabinets, fuel, fence posts.

Habitat: Bottomland woods.

Range: Maine and southern Quebec across to southern Minnesota, south to
      Oklahoma, east to Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The Swamp White Oak is distinguished by its
      leaves which are coarsely round-toothed and softly white hairy on
      the lower surface of the leaves.

    [Illustration: SWAMP WHITE OAK]


                              SCARLET OAK
                       _Quercus coccinea_ Muench.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 70 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2½ feet;
      crown narrow but open.

Bark: Reddish-brown, shallowly fissured when mature.

Twigs: Slender, brown, smooth; leaf scars alternate, but crowded near
      the tip, half-round, slightly elevated, with several bundle
      traces; pith star-shaped in cross-section.

Buds: Pointed, reddish-brown, hairy at the tip, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades divided more than half-way to the
      middle into 5-7 bristle-tipped lobes, bright green, shiny and
      smooth on the upper surface, paler and with tufts of hairs along
      the veins on the lower surface, up to 6½ inches long and 4 inches
      broad; leafstalks up to 2½ inches long, slender, usually smooth.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing when the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate in slender, drooping catkins, the pistillate
      in groups of 1 or 2.

Fruit: Acorns solitary or paired, with or without stalks, the nut oval
      or hemispherical, up to ¾ inch across, reddish-brown with
      occasional darker rings around it, enclosed up to ½ its length by
      the cup, the cup thin, top-shaped, reddish-brown, finely hairy.

Wood: Hard, heavy, coarse-grained, pale brown.

Uses: Fuel, fence posts, coarse construction.

Habitat: Dry woods.

Range: Maine to southern Ontario, south to Oklahoma, east to Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: Scarlet Oak looks very much like Pin Oak, but
      differs in habitat and structure of the acorn cup. It sometimes
      resembles Black Oak but has shorter, less hairy buds and acorns
      without loosely arranged scales on the cup.

    [Illustration: SCARLET OAK]


                               HILL’S OAK
                   _Quercus ellipsoidalis_ E. J. Hill

Other Name: Northern Pin Oak.

Growth Form: Moderate tree to about 75 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2
      feet; crown rounded, with the drooping lowermost branches often
      reaching nearly to the ground.

Bark: Gray-black, rather smooth to shallowly fissured.

Twigs: Rather slender, smooth at maturity, grayish-brown to
      reddish-brown; pith star-shaped in cross-section; leaf scars
      alternate, but clustered near the tip of the twig, half-round,
      slightly elevated, with several bundle traces.

Buds: Nearly smooth, one-fourth inch long, ovoid, reddish-brown.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades 3-9 inches long, slightly tapering or
      usually cut nearly straight across at the base, with 2-4 pairs of
      bristle-tipped lobes usually cut over half-way to the mid-vein,
      deep green and shiny on the upper surface at maturity; leafstalks
      smooth, up to 3 inches long.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate on same tree, appearing as the leaves
      unfold, inconspicuous, the staminate crowded in a catkin, the
      pistillate solitary or 2-3 together.

Fruit: Ripening in October of the second year, on very short stalks;
      acorns longer than broad, short-pointed at the base, about ½ inch
      across, the cup bowl-shaped covering ⅓ to ½ of the acorn.

Wood: Heavy, hard, strong, pale brown.

Uses: Shingles and interior finishings.

Habitat: Dry upland woods, often where Black Oak occurs.

Range: Northwestern Ohio and central Michigan to southeastern Minnesota,
      south to eastern Iowa and north-central Illinois.

Distinguishing Features: The elongated acorn of the Hill’s Oak
      distinguishes it from pin oak, which it closely resembles.

    [Illustration: HILL’S OAK]


                              SPANISH OAK
                        _Quercus falcata_ Michx.

Other Name: Southern Red Oak.

Growth Form: Large tree up to 80 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 4 feet;
      crown broadly rounded, with stiff, stout, spreading branchlets;
      trunk straight, rather stout.

Bark: Dark brown to nearly black, shallowly furrowed.

Twigs: Reddish-brown to gray, smooth or nearly so at maturity; pith
      star-shaped in cross-section; leaf scars alternate but clustered
      near the tip, half-round, slightly elevated, with several bundle
      traces.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, chestnut-brown, hairy, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades broadly rounded at the base, 3- to
      5-lobed, the terminal lobe usually long, narrow, and strongly
      curved, all lobes bristle-tipped, up to 8 inches long, up to 6
      inches wide, green on the upper surface, pale and densely
      soft-hairy on the lower surface; leaf stalk up to 2½ inches long,
      slender, usually hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing when the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate in slender, drooping, densely hairy catkins,
      the pistillate few in a rusty-hairy cluster, with dark red
      stigmas.

Fruit: Acorn usually solitary, with or without a short stalk, the nut
      spherical or ellipsoid, up to ½ inch long, orange-brown, the cup
      covering only up to ⅓ of the nut, with hairy, reddish-brown
      scales.

Wood: Heavy, hard, strong, coarse-grained, reddish-brown.

Uses: Fence posts, fuel, general construction.

Habitat: Dry and usually poor upland soil; occasionally in bottomlands.

Range: Central New Jersey south to central Florida, across to eastern
      Texas, up the Mississippi Basin to central Missouri, south-central
      Illinois, southeastern Indiana, western Kentucky, and western
      Tennessee.

Distinguishing Features: The Spanish Oak is the only bristle-tipped oak
      in Illinois in which the lower leaf surface is covered with a mat
      of fine hairs.

    [Illustration: SPANISH OAK]


                              SHINGLE OAK
                      _Quercus imbricaria_ Michx.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 70 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      feet; crown rounded or oblong, with many branches; trunk straight,
      columnar.

Bark: Dark brown, deeply furrowed between flat, tight plates.

Twigs: Slender, smooth, reddish-brown; pith star-shaped in
      cross-sections; leaf scars alternate but crowded near the tip of
      the twigs, half-round, slightly elevated, with several bundle
      traces.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, brown, smooth, up to ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades without lobes or teeth, lanceolate to
      oblong, with a bristle tip, narrowed to the base, up to 6 inches
      long, up to 2 inches wide, dark green, smooth and shiny on the
      upper surface, paler and hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks up
      to ½ inch long, stout, hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing as the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate in slender, yellow, drooping catkins, the
      pistillate few in a cluster.

Fruit: Acorns solitary or 2 together, stalked, the nut nearly spherical,
      dark brown, less than half enclosed by the cup, the cup
      reddish-brown and slightly hairy.

Wood: Hard, heavy, coarse-grained, light reddish-brown.

Uses: Shingles, general construction.

Habitat: Moist soil along streams or in woods; occasionally on dry,
      exposed sandstone cliffs.

Range: New Jersey across to Wisconsin, Iowa, and Nebraska, south to
      Kansas, east to Arkansas and South Carolina.

Distinguishing Features: Only the Shingle Oak and the Willow Oak, among
      all the oaks, have leaves without any teeth or lobes. The Shingle
      Oak generally has broader leaves than does the Willow Oak. The
      Shingle Oak can be told from Magnolias by its star-shaped pith and
      the formation of acorns.

    [Illustration: SHINGLE OAK]


                              OVERCUP OAK
                         _Quercus lyrata_ Walt.

Growth Form: Medium to large tree up to 80 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to 3 feet; crown rounded to oblong, with several branches, the
      lowermost often drooping; trunk straight, columnar.

Bark: Gray or grayish-brown, divided into flat, sometimes squarish,
      plates.

Twigs: Slender, smooth, buff-colored; pith star-shaped in cross-section;
      leaf scars alternate, but clustered near the tip of the twig,
      half-round, slightly elevated, with several bundle traces.

Buds: Nearly round, smooth, pale brown, up to ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades divided into 5-7 rounded lobes, the
      sinuses shallow to deep, up to 10 inches long, up to 4½ inches
      broad, dark green and smooth on the upper surface, pale and softly
      hairy to nearly smooth on the lower surface; leafstalk up to 1
      inch long, smooth or hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      plant, appearing when the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate in slender, yellow, drooping catkins, the
      pistillate few in a group.

Fruit: Acorns solitary or 2 together, with or without a stalk, the nut
      nearly spherical, up to 1 inch in diameter, pale brown, often
      nearly entirely enclosed by the cup, the cup finely hairy, with
      some of the scales forming a ragged rim near the base.

Wood: Hard, heavy, strong, dark brown.

Uses: Interior finishing, cabinets, fuel, fence posts.

Habitat: Bottomland woods; swamps.

Range: Southern Virginia across to eastern Texas, north up the
      Mississippi Valley to southern Missouri, southern Illinois, and
      southern Indiana; also in Delaware, Maryland, and New Jersey;
      southward to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The best identifying characteristic of this
      plant is the acorn in which the nut often is nearly enclosed by
      the cup.

    [Illustration: OVERCUP OAK]


                                BUR OAK
                      _Quercus macrocarpa_ Michx.

Other Name: Mossy-cup Oak.

Growth Form: Large tree up to 120 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 5
      feet; crown rounded, with stout branches; trunk straight, stout,
      sometimes slightly buttressed at the base.

Bark: Dark brown or yellow-brown, rather deeply furrowed.

Twigs: Stout, dark brown, often with corky ridges; pith star-shaped in
      cross-section; leaf scars alternate but clustered near the tip,
      half-round, slightly elevated, with several bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded or slightly pointed at the tip, yellowish-brown to
      reddish-brown, finely hairy.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades broader at the upper end, coarsely
      round-toothed, usually with a pair of deep sinuses just below the
      middle, often with as many as 5-7 lobes, the lobes not
      bristle-tipped, dark green and smooth or slightly hairy on the
      upper surface, paler and softly hairy on the lower surface, up to
      14 inches long and 7 inches wide; leaf stalks up to 1 inch long,
      stout, smooth or finely hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing as the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate in slender, drooping catkins, the pistillate
      few in a group, with red stigmas.

Fruit: Acorn usually solitary, with or without a stalk, the nut ovoid to
      ellipsoid, dark brown, up to 1¾ inches long, the cup covering half
      to nearly all the nut, hairy, the lowermost scales long-fringed.

Wood: Heavy, hard, durable, close-grained, brown.

Uses: Cabinets, ship-building, fenceposts, fuel, tight cooperage.

Habitat: Dry ridges to bottomland woods.

Range: Vermont across to North Dakota, south to Texas, east to Arkansas,
      Tennessee, and Maryland.

Distinguishing Features: The leaves of the Bur Oak are distinctive
      because they are very broad in the upper half with a pair of deep
      sinuses a little below the middle. The large, fringed cups are
      also distinctive.

    [Illustration: BUR OAK]


                             BLACKJACK OAK
                     _Quercus marilandica_ Muench.

Other Name: Scrub Oak.

Growth Form: Relatively small tree, at most attaining a height of 50
      feet, usually much shorter and often very gnarled; trunk diameter
      up to 1½ feet; crown exceedingly round-topped, with numerous lower
      branches hanging downward.

Bark: Dark brown, shallowly ridged.

Twigs: Moderately stout, brown, more or less hairy; pith star-shaped in
      cross-section; leaf scars alternate but clustered near the top,
      half-round, slightly elevated, with several bundle traces.

Buds: Angular, from ¼-½ inch long, somewhat hairy.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades about 4-8 inches long, leathery, very
      much broader near the apex than the base, mostly rounded or even
      somewhat heart shaped at the base, more or less 3-lobed and
      bristle-tipped nearer the apex, the upper surface hairy at first,
      becoming shiny dark green at maturity, the lower surface
      permanently hairy; leafstalks less than 1 inch long.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate on the same tree, appearing as the
      leaves unfold, inconspicuous, the staminate crowded in a catkin,
      the pistillate solitary or 2-3 together.

Fruit: Ripening in October of the second year, on very short stalks, or
      the stalks sometimes lacking; acorns nearly round, usually at most
      only ½ inch in diameter, the cup enclosing ½ the acorn, with
      rather loosely arranged scales.

Wood: Hard, strong, heavy, dark brown.

Uses: Excellent as a source of charcoal and fuel.

Habitat: Poor soil, particularly on dry, exposed rocky cliffs.

Range: New York across to Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and
      southern Iowa to southeastern Nebraska, south into eastern Kansas,
      eastern Oklahoma, and eastern Texas, then east to northern
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The 3-lobed leaf, much broader at the apex, is
      the most distinctive characteristic of this oak.

    [Illustration: BLACKJACK OAK]


                           SWAMP CHESTNUT OAK
                       _Quercus michauxii_ Nutt.

Other Names: Basket Oak; Cow Oak.

Growth Form: Medium to large tree up to nearly 100 feet tall; trunk
      diameter up to 6 feet; crown rounded.

Bark: Gray or silvery-white, scaly.

Twigs: Stout, reddish-brown to gray, smooth or nearly so; leaf scars
      alternate but crowded near the tip, half-round, slightly elevated,
      with several bundle traces; pith star-shaped in cross-section.

Buds: Pointed, finely hairy, reddish-brown, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades obovate, pointed at the tip, rounded
      or tapering to the base, up to 10 inches long and 6 inches broad,
      coarsely scalloped along the edges, thick, green and sparsely
      hairy on the upper surface, whitish and densely hairy on the lower
      surface; leafstalk up to 1½ inches long, hairy.

Flowers: Borne separately but on the same tree, minute, without petals,
      the staminate crowded into long, slender catkins, the pistillate
      few in a cluster.

Fruit: Acorns solitary or paired, with or without short stalks, the nut
      ovoid to ellipsoid, brown, up to 1½ inches long, enclosed about ⅓
      its length by the cup, the cup thick, cup-shaped, hairy,
      short-fringed along the rim.

Wood: Hard, heavy, strong, close-grained, pale brown.

Uses: General construction, fuel, fence posts.

Habitat: Low woods.

Range: New Jersey across to southern Missouri, south to Texas, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Swamp Chestnut Oak is distinguished from
      other coarsely toothed oaks by the densely hairy, whitish lower
      leaf surfaces and its short-stalked acorns.

    [Illustration: SWAMP CHESTNUT OAK]


                          YELLOW CHESTNUT OAK
                     _Quercus muhlenbergii_ Engelm.

Other Names: Chinquapin; Chinquapin Oak.

Growth Form: Large tree up to 100 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 4
      feet; crown oblong or rounded, with many branches; trunk straight,
      columnar, buttressed at the base.

Bark: Pale gray, with scaly ridges.

Twigs: Slender, yellow-brown or reddish-brown; pith star-shaped in
      cross-section; leaf scars alternate but clustered near the tip,
      half-round, with several bundle traces; pith star-shaped in
      cross-section.

Buds: Pointed, smooth, chestnut-brown, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades narrowly to broadly lanceolate,
      pointed at the tip, narrowed or rounded at the base, coarsely
      toothed along the edges, smooth and yellow-green on the upper
      surface, paler and usually finely hairy on the lower surface, up
      to 8 inches long and 5 inches broad; leafstalk up to 1½ inches
      long, slender, usually smooth.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, minute, without petals, the staminate crowded into long,
      slender catkins, the pistillate few in a group, with red stigmas.

Fruit: Acorns borne in groups of 1 or 2, usually on a short stalk, the
      nut ovoid, chestnut-colored, up to ¾ inch long, the cup covering
      about ½ the nut, the scales of the cup hairy and usually with a
      short fringe.

Wood: Heavy, strong, durable, close-grained.

Uses: Fence posts, fuel, railroad ties.

Habitat: Low rich slopes; wooded hillsides; dry cliffs.

Range: Vermont across to southern Minnesota, south to eastern Nebraska
      and eastern Texas, east to northern Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Yellow Chestnut Oak is distinguished from
      the other coarsely toothed oaks by its usually sharper pointed
      teeth and by the size and shape of its acorns.

    [Illustration: YELLOW CHESTNUT OAK]


                             CHERRYBARK OAK
                      _Quercus pagodaefolia_ Ell.

Other Name: Swamp Spanish Oak.

Growth Form: Large tree up to 100 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 4
      feet; crown broadly rounded; trunk straight, columnar.

Bark: Dark gray, broken by narrow ridges into small scales.

Twigs: Rather stout, reddish-brown or gray, usually hairy when young,
      becoming smooth; pith star-shaped in cross-section; leaf scars
      alternate but clustered near tip of the twigs, half-round,
      slightly elevated, with several bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, angular, hairy, chestnut-brown, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades divided into 5-11 pointed lobes, the
      sinuses cut about half-way to the midvein, up to 10 inches long,
      up to 7 inches wide, dark green, smooth and shiny on the upper
      surface, pale and hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks up to 2
      inches long, stout, hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      plant, appearing when the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate in slender, drooping catkins, the pistillate
      few together.

Fruit: Acorns solitary or 2 together, with or without a stalk, the nut
      ellipsoid, about ½ inch long, brown, enclosed for less than ⅓ its
      length by the cup, the cup finely hairy.

Wood: Strong, hard, coarse-grained, light reddish-brown.

Uses: Interior finishing, furniture, cabinets.

Habitat: Bottomlands and river banks.

Range: Southeastern Virginia to southeastern Missouri, south to Texas,
      east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The shape of the leaf is distinctive for this
      oak.

    [Illustration: CHERRYBARK OAK]


                                PIN OAK
                      _Quercus palustris_ Muench.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 75 feet tall; trunk diameter usually less
      than 3 feet; crown narrowly rounded or oblong, but with the lower
      branches drooping; trunk straight, with pin-like stubs developing
      rather low on the trunk.

Bark: Light brown or dark brown, scarcely furrowed.

Twigs: Slender, smooth, reddish-brown to dark gray; pith star-shaped in
      cross-section; leaf scars alternate but crowded near the tip,
      half-round, usually slightly elevated, with several bundle traces.

Buds: Pointed, reddish-brown or dark gray, smooth, up to ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades divided more than half-way to the
      middle into 5-7 bristle-tipped lobes, dark green, shiny and more
      or less smooth on the upper surface, paler and with tufts of hairs
      along the veins on the lower surface, up to 7 inches long and 4
      inches broad; leafstalk up to 2 inches long, slender, usually
      smooth.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing when the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate in slender, drooping catkins, the pistillate
      in groups of 1-3.

Fruit: Acorns 1-4 together, with or without stalks, the nut
      hemispherical, up to ½ inch across, pale brown, frequently with
      darker lines, enclosed less than ¼ by the cup, the cup thin,
      saucer-shaped, reddish-brown, finely hairy.

Wood: Hard, heavy, coarse-grained, pale brown.

Uses: General construction, fuel, fence posts, ornamental.

Habitat: Moist soil; in floodplain woods; along streams; edges of swamps
      and ponds.

Range: Massachusetts across to southeastern Iowa, south to northeastern
      Oklahoma, east to northern Virginia.

Distinguishing Features: Pin Oak is recognized by its drooping lower
      branches and its small acorns.

    [Illustration: PIN OAK]


                               WILLOW OAK
                          _Quercus phellos_ L.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 75 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3 feet;
      crown narrowly round-topped.

Bark: Reddish-brown, smooth at first, becoming irregularly and shallowly
      furrowed with age.

Twigs: Slender, smooth, reddish-brown; pith star-shaped in
      cross-section; leaf scars alternate but crowded near the tip of
      the twigs, half-round, slightly elevated, with several bundle
      traces.

Buds: Ovoid, pointed, smooth, up to ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades without lobes or teeth, narrowly
      lanceolate to narrowly oblong, with a bristle tip, narrowed to the
      base, up to 5 inches long, up to 1 inch broad, light green and
      smooth on the upper surface, usually smooth and paler on the lower
      surface; leafstalks up to ½ inch long, smooth or slightly hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing as the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate in slender, drooping catkins, the pistillate
      few in a cluster.

Fruit: Acorns solitary or 2 together, with or without a short stalk, the
      nut more or less spherical, pale yellow-brown, enclosed less than
      ¼ its length by the cup, the cup reddish-brown, finely hairy.

Wood: Heavy, rather soft, strong, coarse-grained, pale reddish-brown.

Use: General construction.

Habitat: Swampy woods.

Range: New York across to southern Illinois and eastern Oklahoma, south
      to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: This and the Shingle Oak are the only oaks in
      Illinois with unlobed, untoothed leaves. The leaves of the Willow
      Oak are usually much narrower than those of the Shingle Oak.

    [Illustration: WILLOW OAK]


                           ROCK CHESTNUT OAK
                          _Quercus prinus_ L.

Other Name: Chestnut Oak.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 55 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2½
      feet; crown broad but irregular.

Bark: Dark brown, with conspicuous furrows between the rounded ridges.

Twigs: Rather stout, reddish-brown, smooth or nearly so; leaf scars
      alternate, but clustered near the tip of the twig, half-round,
      with several bundle traces; pith star-shaped in cross-section.

Buds: Pointed, brown, somewhat hairy, up to ½ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades obovate to broadly lanceolate, pointed
      at the tip, narrowed to the base, thick and leathery, coarsely
      round-toothed along the edges, smooth, shiny, and yellow-green on
      the upper surface, finely hairy over all the lower surface, up to
      9 inches long and up to 4 inches broad; leafstalk up to 1 inch
      long, smooth or slightly hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, minute, without petals, the staminate crowded into long,
      slender catkins, the pistillate few in a group.

Fruit: Acorns borne in groups of 1 or 2, usually on a short stalk, the
      nut ovoid to ellipsoid, chestnut-colored, up to 1½ inches long,
      the cup covering about ½ the nut or less, the scales of the cup
      reddish-brown and warty.

Wood: Hard, heavy, strong, close-grained.

Uses: Fence posts, railroad ties, fuel.

Habitat: Dry, rocky, wooded slopes.

Range: Maine across to southern Illinois, south to Mississippi and
      Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The acorns of the Rock Chestnut Oak are about
      twice the size as those of the Yellow Chestnut Oak. The teeth of
      the leaves of the Rock Chestnut Oak tend to be more rounded than
      the pointed teeth of the Yellow Chestnut Oak.

    [Illustration: ROCK CHESTNUT OAK]


                            NORTHERN RED OAK
                           _Quercus rubra_ L.

Other Name: Red Oak.

Growth Form: Medium to tall tree to 80 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3
      feet; crown broadly rounded, with large spreading branches; trunk
      straight, columnar, often buttressed at the base.

Bark: Grayish-brown, reddish-brown, blackish, or gray, with dark
      stripes.

Twigs: Slender, smooth, reddish-brown; pith star-shaped in
      cross-section; leaf scars alternate, but clustered near the tip of
      the twig, half-round, slightly elevated, with several bundle
      traces.

Buds: Pointed, smooth, reddish-brown, shiny, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades rather shallowly 7- to 11-lobed, the
      lobes bristle-tipped, dark green and smooth or somewhat hairy on
      the upper surface, paler and smooth or often with hairs along the
      veins on the lower surface, up to 10 inches long, up to 6 inches
      broad; leafstalks up to 2 inches long, stout, usually smooth.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing as the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate in slender, drooping catkins, the pistillate
      in groups of 1-3.

Fruit: Acorns solitary or 2 together, with or without stalks, the nut
      ovoid, up to 1½ inches long, pale brown, covered less than ¼ by
      the cup, the cup reddish-brown, with tight scales.

Wood: Hard, heavy, close-grained, light brown.

Uses: Interior finishing, furniture, fuel, fence posts.

Habitat: Rich, upland woods; along river banks; on well-drained slopes.

Range: New Brunswick, across southern Quebec and Ontario, to
      northcentral Minnesota, south to eastern Kansas, east across
      Missouri, Illinois, Kentucky, and in the mountains of eastern
      Tennessee and northeastern Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The acorn with its very shallow, saucer-shaped
      cap is the best identifying characteristic for the Red Oak. The
      leaves are generally more shallowly lobed than those of the Black
      Oak, Southern Red Oak, and Scarlet Oak.

    [Illustration: NORTHERN RED OAK]


                             SHUMARD’S OAK
                       _Quercus shumardii_ Buckl.

Other Names: Southern Red Oak; Schneck’s Oak.

Growth Form: Up to 120 feet tall; trunk up to 5 feet in diameter; crown
      broad and open, with wide-spreading branches.

Bark: Firmly ridged and dark brownish-black.

Twigs: Generally stouter than those of the Red Oak, smooth; pith
      star-shaped in cross-section; leaf scars alternate, but clustered
      near the tip of the twig, half-round, slightly elevated, with
      several bundle traces.

Buds: Smooth, red-brown, about one-third inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades up to 8 inches long, straight across
      or somewhat wedge-shaped at the base, with 2-4 pairs of lobes
      divided over ⅔’s the way to the mid-nerve, each lobe toothed and
      bristle-pointed at the tips, the sinuses broadly rounded, dark
      green and shiny above, with white tufts of hair in the vein axils
      beneath; leafstalks slender, smooth, up to 2½ inches long.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate on the same tree, appearing as the
      leaves unfold, inconspicuous, the staminate crowded in a catkin,
      the pistillate solitary or 2-3 together.

Fruit: Ripening in October of the second year, on stalks less than ¼
      inch long, usually produced singly; acorns broadly egg-shaped,
      short-pointed at the base and flat at the top, up to 1¼ inches
      long and about ¾ as broad, light brown; cup shallow, about ¼-⅓
      covering the acorn, with closely appressed, densely short-woolly
      scales.

Wood: Light, strong, durable; not distinguished commercially from Red
      Oak.

Uses: Interior finishing and furniture.

Habitat: Bottomland woods and stream banks.

Range: Most abundant in the Mississippi basin, but known from Florida
      and Texas, north to Maryland, Pennsylvania, eastcentral Kentucky,
      Indiana, central Illinois, the eastern half of Iowa, and
      southeastern Kansas. The largest known Shumard’s Oak in the
      country occurs at Beall Woods in Wabash County, Illinois.

Distinguishing Features: Deeply lobed, shiny leaves with broadly rounded
      sinuses.

    [Illustration: SHUMARD’S OAK]


                                POST OAK
                        _Quercus stellata_ Wang.

Growth Form: Small to medium tree up to 60 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to 3 feet; crown rounded or obovoid, with rather stout branches;
      trunk gnarled or straight, usually not buttressed.

Bark: Gray or light brown, divided into flat, sometimes squarish,
      plates.

Twigs: Stout, brownish, covered when young by a tawny-colored fuzziness;
      pith star-shaped in cross-section; leaf scars alternate but
      densely clustered toward the tip, half-round, usually slightly
      elevated, with several bundle traces.

Buds: Spherical but often short-pointed, reddish-brown, up to ⅛ inch
      long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades thick, 5-lobed, the upper three lobes
      squarish, separated from the lowest pair of lobes by a deep sinus,
      up to 6 inches long, up to 4½ inches wide, dark green and hairy on
      the upper surface, paler and hairy on the lower surface;
      leafstalks up to 1 inch long, stout, hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing when the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate in slender, yellow, drooping catkins, the
      pistillate few in a cluster.

Fruit: Acorns solitary or 2 together, with or without a short stalk, the
      nut oval to oblong, up to 1 inch long, pale brown, less than half
      enclosed by the cup, the cup reddish-brown, hairy.

Wood: Hard, heavy, close-grained, brown.

Uses: Fence posts, fuel, general construction.

Habitat: Dry woods; dry bluffs.

Range: Massachusetts across to Kansas, south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The 3 squarish lobes at the upper end of the
      thick leaves distinguish the Post Oak.

    [Illustration: POST OAK]


                               BLACK OAK
                        _Quercus velutina_ Lam.

Other Name: Yellow-bark Oak.

Growth Form: Large tree up to 80 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 3½
      feet; crown broadly rounded or oblong, with spreading branches;
      trunk straight, columnar, scarcely buttressed at the base.

Bark: Black, with a yellow or orange inner bark, deeply furrowed.

Twigs: Slender or rather stout, reddish-brown to dark brown; pith
      star-shaped in cross-section; leaf scars alternate but clustered
      near the tip, half-round, slightly elevated, with several bundle
      traces.

Buds: Pointed, angular, gray or reddish-brown, hairy, up to ½ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades deeply to shallowly 7- to 9-lobed, the
      lobes bristle-tipped, dark green, shiny and usually smooth on the
      upper surface, smooth, finely hairy, or hairy only along the veins
      on the lower surface, up to 10 inches long and 8 inches wide; leaf
      stalk up to 5 inches long, stout, smooth or finely hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate borne separately, but on the same
      tree, appearing when the leaves begin to unfold, minute, without
      petals, the staminate in slender, drooping clusters, the
      pistillate in groups of 1-4.

Fruit: Acorns solitary or 2 together, with or without a short stalk, the
      nut ovoid or ellipsoid, up to ¾ inch long, reddish-brown, not more
      than ½ enclosed by the cup, the cup with scales not appressed at
      the tip, thus appearing ragged.

Wood: Hard, heavy, coarse-grained, reddish-brown.

Uses: General construction, fuel, fence posts.

Habitat: Mostly upland woods.

Range: Maine across to south-central Minnesota, south to eastern Texas,
      east to northern Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Black Oak is easily distinguished by its large,
      angular, gray-hairy buds and its acorns with their ragged-edged
      cup.

    [Illustration: BLACK OAK]


                           CAROLINA BUCKTHORN
                      _Rhamnus caroliniana_ Walt.

Growth Form: Small tree to 30 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 6 inches;
      crown spreading.

Bark: Gray, somewhat roughened.

Twigs: Slender, gray or pale brown, smooth or somewhat hairy; leaf scars
      alternate, crescent-shaped, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Lance-shaped, pointed, up to ¼ inch long, very hairy.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades elliptic, short-pointed at the tip,
      tapering or somewhat rounded at the base, up to 6 inches long, up
      to 2 inches broad, finely toothed or toothless along the edges,
      dark green, smooth, and glossy on the upper surface, paler and
      smooth or finely hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks finely
      hairy, up to 1 inch long.

Flowers: Few in umbrella-like clusters, inconspicuous, appearing when
      the leaves are nearly grown, each flower with 5 small petals.

Fruit: Spherical berries, up to ⅓ inch in diameter, red and shiny,
      containing 2-4 seeds.

Wood: Hard, light in weight, close-grained, light brown.

Use: Fuel.

Habitat: Rocky woods and along streams.

Range: Virginia across to Kansas, south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Carolina Buckthorn is distinguished by its
      shiny, elliptical leaves, its red berries, and its small stature.

    [Illustration: CAROLINA BUCKTHORN]


                            COMMON BUCKTHORN
                        _Rhamnus cathartica_ L.

Growth Form: Small tree to 25 feet tall, often branching from near the
      base; trunk diameter up to 10 inches; crown spreading and
      irregular.

Bark: Gray to brown, roughened when mature.

Twigs: Gray to brown, usually smooth, some of them usually ending in a
      spine; leaf scars opposite to nearly so, narrow, with 3 bundle
      traces.

Buds: Lanceolate, brown, smooth, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Broadly elliptic to ovate to nearly orbicular, rounded to
      pointed at the tip, usually rounded at the base, up to 2½ inches
      long and up to 1½ inches wide, finely toothed along the edges,
      smooth on both surfaces, the veins prominent; leafstalks slender,
      smooth, up to 1 inch long.

Flowers: Borne in clusters from the axils of the leaves, during May and
      June, some of them either only staminate or only pistillate, some
      of them with both stamens and pistils, each flower with 4 small
      petals.

Fruit: Nearly round, fleshy, black, up to ¼ inch in diameter, bitter,
      containing 3 or 4 seeds.

Wood: Heavy, hard, durable, yellowish, fine-grained.

Uses: This tree is sometimes planted as an ornamental hedge. The wood is
      used in making such things as tool handles. The fruits serve as a
      powerful purging agent.

Habitat: Thickets.

Range: Native of Europe and Asia; naturalized throughout much of
      northeastern North America.

Distinguishing Features: The spine-tipped twigs, nearly opposite leaves,
      and small black fruits readily distinguish this species.

    [Illustration: COMMON BUCKTHORN]


                             SHINING SUMAC
                          _Rhus copallina_ L.

Other Names: Dwarf Sumac; Winged Sumac.

Growth Form: Small tree to 35 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 6 inches;
      crown widely spreading.

Bark: Dark brown, roughened.

Twigs: Rather stout, gray-brown to reddish-brown, sometimes hairy, with
      conspicuous red lenticels; leaf scars alternate, U-shaped,
      elevated with 6-9 bundle traces.

Buds: More or less rounded, rusty-hairy, about ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with as many as 21 leaflets;
      leaflets oblong to elliptic, up to 3 inches long and 1 inch broad,
      sharp pointed at the apex, tapering or rounded at the sometimes
      asymmetrical base, smooth or with low teeth along the edges, dark
      green, smooth and shiny on the upper surface, paler and hairy on
      the lower surface, all leaflets attached to a winged stalk. The
      leaves turn a deep red or wine color in the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate sometimes borne on separate plants,
      sometimes on the same plant, sometimes in the same flower,
      numerous in much branched clusters, appearing from late May to
      mid-August, each flower greenish-yellow, small.

Fruit: Cluster of red berries, each berry round, finely hairy, up to ⅛
      inch in diameter, containing a single orange seed.

Wood: Light in weight, soft, coarse-grained, pale brown.

Use: Sometimes grown as an ornamental.

Habitat: Dry hills, fields.

Range: Maine across southern Michigan to eastern Nebraska, south to
      Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Shining Sumac is readily distinguished by
      the winged stalk to which the leaflets are attached.

    [Illustration: SHINING SUMAC]


                              SMOOTH SUMAC
                            _Rhus glabra_ L.

Growth Form: Small tree up to 20 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 8
      inches; crown widely spreading.

Bark: Light brown, smooth on young plants, becoming somewhat rough at
      maturity.

Twigs: Stout, angular, smooth, reddish-brown or greenish-brown and
      covered by a whitish coat which can be wiped off, leaf scars
      alternate, nearly encircling the bud, elevated, with 6-9 bundle
      traces.

Buds: More or less rounded, smooth, about ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with up to 31 leaflets; leaflets
      lance-shaped, up to 4 inches long, less than 2 inches broad, sharp
      pointed at the apex, tapering or rounded at the often asymmetrical
      base, toothed along the edges, green and smooth on the upper
      surface, nearly white and smooth on the lower surface. The leaves
      turn red in the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate sometimes borne on separate plants,
      sometimes on the same plant, sometimes in the same flower,
      numerous in much branched clusters, appearing from late May to
      mid-August, each flower greenish-yellow, small.

Fruit: Cluster of red berries, each berry round, smooth, up to ⅛ inch in
      diameter, containing a single brown seed.

Wood: Light in weight, soft, pale.

Use: Sometimes grown as an ornamental.

Habitat: Woods, fields, disturbed areas.

Range: Nova Scotia across to Manitoba and North Dakota, south to Texas,
      east to Florida; also in Mexico.

Distinguishing Features: This species lacks the winged leaf stalks of
      the Shining Sumac and lacks the velvety twigs of the Staghorn
      Sumac.

    [Illustration: SMOOTH SUMAC]


                             STAGHORN SUMAC
                           _Rhus typhina_ L.

Growth Form: Small to medium tree up to 40 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to 15 inches; crown broadly rounded or sometimes flat.

Bark: Dark brown, smooth at first, becoming scaly in age.

Twigs: Stout, dark brown, covered by velvety hairs; leaf scars nearly
      encircling the twigs, with 6-9 bundle traces.

Buds: More or less rounded, hairy, about ⅛ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with up to 31 leaflets; leaflets
      lance-shaped, up to 5 inches long, less than 2 inches broad,
      pointed at the tip, tapering or rounded at the usually
      asymmetrical base, toothed along the edges, dark green and smooth
      on the upper surface, paler and smooth except for the hairy veins
      on the lower surface. The leaves turn purple to red to orange in
      the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate sometimes borne on separate plants,
      sometimes on the same plant, sometimes in the same flower,
      numerous in much branched clusters, appearing from June to August,
      each flower greenish, greenish-yellow, or reddish.

Fruit: Dense cluster of red berries, each berry round, conspicuously
      hairy, up to ⅛ inch in diameter, containing a single brown seed.

Wood: Light in weight, soft, coarse-grained, orange.

Use: Sometimes grown as an ornamental.

Habitat: Woods and thickets.

Range: Nova Scotia across to Minnesota, south to Iowa and Kentucky, east
      to North Carolina.

Distinguishing Features: The densely velvety twigs are distinctive for
      this species.

    [Illustration: STAGHORN SUMAC]


                              POISON SUMAC
                            _Rhus vernix_ L.

Growth Form: Small tree or shrub to 20 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 5
      inches; crown narrowly rounded.

Bark: Gray, smooth.

Twigs: Rather stout, smooth, orange-brown to gray; leaf scars alternate,
      rounded except for where the bud is, with several bundle traces.

Buds: Rounded or somewhat pointed, about ¼ inch in diameter, except for
      the larger, terminal one, hairy, often purplish.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with 7-13 leaflets; leaflets
      elliptic to obovate, pointed at the tip, rounded or tapering to
      the base, up to 4 inches long, up to half as wide, dark green and
      smooth on the upper surface, paler and usually smooth on the lower
      surface, the edges without teeth. The leaves turn a brilliant
      scarlet in the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate sometimes borne on separate plants,
      sometimes on the same plant, sometimes in the same flower,
      numerous in much branched clusters, appearing from May to July,
      each flower greenish-yellow, small.

Fruit: Cluster of white or creamy berries, each berry round, smooth,
      shiny, up to ½ inch in diameter, containing a single yellow seed.

Wood: Soft, light in weight, coarse-grained, yellow-brown.

Use: Little used because of the extremely poisonous nature of most parts
      of the plant to the touch.

Habitat: Bogs and swampy woods.

Range: Maine across southern Ontario to Minnesota, south to Texas, east
      to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: This species differs from other sumacs with
      numerous leaflets by the absence of teeth along the edges of the
      leaves and by the absence of a winged stalk between the leaflets.

    [Illustration: POISON SUMAC]


                              BLACK LOCUST
                       _Robinia pseudoacacia_ L.

Growth Form: Moderate tree up to 70 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 2½
      feet; crown narrowly oblong, with irregularly ascending or
      spreading branches.

Bark: Gray or black, deeply furrowed, with numerous, elevated, scaly
      ridges.

Twigs: Slender but strong, angular, often zigzag, reddish-brown, with a
      pair of short, sharp thorns where each leaf is attached; leaf
      scars alternate, three-lobed, with 3 bundle traces per lobe.

Buds: Sunken in the twigs, dark brown, without bud scales, up to
      one-eighth inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, pinnately compound, with 7-21 leaflets; leaflets
      oval, rounded at both ends but usually with a short point at the
      tip, without teeth, blue-green and smooth on the upper surface,
      paler and smooth on the lower surface except for the veins, up to
      two inches long and nearly half as wide. The leaflets turn yellow
      in the autumn.

Flowers: In long, drooping clusters, white with a yellow spot, very
      fragrant, up to 1 inch long, appearing in May and June.

Fruit: Legumes up to 4 inches long and about ½ inch wide, flat, smooth,
      reddish-brown, with 4-8 seeds.

Wood: Hard, heavy, strong, brown.

Uses: Fence posts, tool handles; often planted as an ornamental.

Habitat: Woodlands, thickets, roadsides.

Range: Pennsylvania across to Oklahoma, east to Georgia; often planted
      in other regions of the eastern United States.

Distinguishing Features: The pinnately compound leaves with up to 21
      oval, smooth-edged leaflets, together with the pairs of spines,
      serve to distinguish this species.

    [Illustration: BLACK LOCUST]


                          PEACH-LEAVED WILLOW
                      _Salix amygdaloides_ Anders.

Growth Form: Moderate tree up to 60 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1½
      feet; crown narrowly rounded.

Bark: Grayish-brown, shallowly furrowed, becoming somewhat scaly.

Twigs: Slender, pale brown to grayish, smooth; leaf scars alternate,
      U-shaped, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Small, oblong, brown, up to one-sixth inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades broadly lance-shaped, long-pointed at
      the tip, rounded or tapering to the base, up to 5 inches long,
      finely toothed along the edges, dark green and shiny on the upper
      surface, pale on the lower surface; leaf stalks up to ½ inch long.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne on separate trees,
      minute, crowded into elongated catkins, appearing as the leaves
      begin to unfold.

Fruit: Several rather broad, flask-shaped, brown capsules up to
      one-sixth inch long, crowded in elongated clusters.

Wood: Light weight, soft, pale brown.

Use: Fuel.

Habitat: Along streams, around lakes and ponds.

Range: Vermont across southern Ontario to British Columbia, south to New
      Mexico, east across southern Illinois to central New York.

Distinguishing Features: This willow has broader leaves than almost any
      other willow in Illinois. The pale lower surface of the leaves
      also distinguishes it from the Black Willow.

    [Illustration: PEACH-LEAVED WILLOW]


                            CAROLINA WILLOW
                       _Salix caroliniana_ Michx.

Other Name: Ward’s Willow.

Growth Form: Medium tree to 40 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1 foot;
      crown widely spreading, often irregular.

Bark: Dark brown to gray to black, scaly and ridged.

Twigs: Slender, brown, usually finely hairy; leaf scars alternate,
      U-shaped, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Small, oblong, reddish-brown, smooth, up to one-eighth inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades lanceolate, long-pointed at the tip,
      tapering to the base, up to 5 inches long and up to 1 inch broad,
      finely toothed along the edges, green and smooth on the upper
      surface, whitish and smooth on the lower surface; stipules
      conspicuous; leafstalks up to ½ inch long, hairy.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne on separate trees,
      appearing as the leaves begin to unfold, crowded in elongated,
      yellowish, hairy catkins.

Fruit: Several narrow, flask-shaped, brownish capsules up to ¼ inch
      long, crowded in elongated clusters.

Wood: Light weight, soft, not strong.

Use: Fuel.

Habitat: Moist woods, along streams.

Range: Maryland across southern Illinois to Kansas, south to Texas and
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The leaves of the Carolina Willow are shaped
      similarly to those of the Black Willow, but differ by being
      whitened on the lower surface.

    [Illustration: CAROLINA WILLOW]


                             SANDBAR WILLOW
                        _Salix interior_ Rowlee

Growth Form: Small tree to 25 feet tall; trunk diameter less than 1
      foot; crown irregular.

Bark: Gray, furrowed, broken into rough scales.

Twigs: Slender, grayish-green, smooth; leaf scars alternate, U-shaped,
      with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Small, oblong, pale brown, up to one-sixth inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades very narrow, pointed at the tip,
      tapering to the base, to 4 inches long, less than one-half inch
      broad, with widely spaced teeth along the edges, green and usually
      smooth on both surfaces when mature; leafstalks nearly absent.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne on separate trees,
      minute, crowded into elongated catkins, appearing when the leaves
      are partly grown.

Fruit: Several flask-shaped, brownish, smooth or silky capsules up to
      one-eighth inch long, crowded in elongated clusters.

Wood: Light weight, soft, weak.

Use: Fuel.

Habitat: Along streams, often forming thickets.

Range: Quebec across to Alaska, south to Oklahoma and Arkansas, east to
      Maryland.

Distinguishing Features: The best characteristics to identify this small
      tree are the narrow leaves with the teeth relatively far apart.

    [Illustration: SANDBAR WILLOW]


                              BLACK WILLOW
                          _Salix nigra_ Marsh.

Growth Form: Medium to large tree up to 90 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to three feet; crown usually round-topped, but sometimes
      irregular.

Bark: Rough, furrowed, forming elongated, vertical, rather tight scales.

Twigs: Slender, olive-green, smooth; leaf scars alternate, U-shaped,
      with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Small, oblong, reddish-brown, up to one-eighth inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades narrowly lance-shaped, usually curved,
      long-pointed at the tip, rounded or tapering at the base, up to 6
      inches long, finely toothed along the edges, green and shiny on
      the upper surface, smooth or hairy on the veins of the lower
      surface; leafstalks short, often surrounded at the base by a pair
      of green leaf-like stipules.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne on separate trees,
      minute, crowded in elongated catkins, appearing as the leaves
      begin to unfold.

Fruit: Several narrow, flask-shaped, reddish-brown capsules up to
      one-eighth inch long, crowded in elongated clusters.

Wood: Light weight, soft, not strong.

Uses: Flooring, boxes, crates, fuel.

Habitat: Wet ground, frequently along rivers and streams.

Range: New Brunswick across to Ontario, south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The narrow lance-shaped leaves which are green
      on the lower surface and which have many fine teeth along the
      edges distinguish this willow from other willows in Illinois.

    [Illustration: BLACK WILLOW]


                               SASSAFRAS
                    _Sassafras albidum_ (Nutt.) Nees

Other Names: White Sassafras; Red Sassafras.

Growth Form: Usually small to moderate tree up to 40 feet tall, but
      rarely as much as 80 feet tall; trunk diameter usually up to 2
      feet, rarely as much as six feet; crown flat-topped, irregular,
      oblong.

Bark: Greenish-gray when young, becoming deeply furrowed and dark
      reddish-brown when older.

Twigs: Slender, green, smooth, aromatic; leaf scars alternate, small,
      half-round, usually with three bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, scarcely pointed at the tip, greenish, up to one-fourth
      inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades of three different shapes, some
      3-lobed, some 2-lobed, some unlobed, tapering to the base, up to 6
      inches long, without teeth along the edges, green and smooth on
      the upper surface, paler and either smooth or hairy on the lower
      surface. The leaves turn brilliant shades of orange, red, and
      yellow in the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate and pistillate flowers borne on separate trees, in
      few-flowered clusters as the leaves begin to unfold, each flower
      about ⅓ inch long, greenish-yellow.

Fruit: Dark blue berries about one-third inch long in deep red cups and
      on stalks up to 2 inches long.

Wood: Soft, brittle, orange-brown.

Uses: Fence posts; the roots are strongly aromatic and are dug, dried,
      and used in the making of sassafras tea.

Habitat: Roadsides, old fields, woods.

Range: Maine across to Michigan and (formerly) Wisconsin, south to
      Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The Sassafras is distinguished by its
      distinctively shaped, aromatic leaves and its green twigs.

    [Illustration: SASSAFRAS]


                              BALD CYPRESS
                    _Taxodium distichum_ (L.) Rich.

Growth Form: Large tree to over 100 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 8
      feet; crown open and spreading to pyramidal; base of trunk often
      swollen; “knees” usually produced if tree is growing in water.

Bark: Pale reddish-brown, broken into numerous thin scales, becoming
      fibrous.

Twigs: Slender, reddish-brown; leaf scars absent.

Buds: Spherical, up to ⅛ inch in diameter, pale brown.

Leaves: Needles borne singly, pointed at the tip, up to ¾ inch long,
      yellow-green, falling away during the autumn.

Flowers: Staminate borne in branched clusters up to 5 inches long,
      purplish; pistillate few to several near the ends of the twigs,
      spherical.

Fruit: Cones nearly spherical, up to 1 inch in diameter, green to brown,
      wrinkled in appearance.

Wood: Soft, durable, light in weight, brown.

Uses: Railroad ties, fence posts, barrels, bridges; often planted as an
      ornamental.

Habitat: Swamps and low, wet woods.

Range: New Jersey across to southern Illinois and southern Missouri to
      eastern Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Bald Cypress is distinguished by the feathery
      appearance of its leaves and by its spherical, wrinkled cones.

    [Illustration: BALD CYPRESS]


                                BASSWOOD
                          _Tilia americana_ L.

Other Name: Linden.

Growth Form: Medium or large tree to 80 feet tall; trunk diameter up to
      2 feet; crown broadly rounded.

Bark: Brown, scaly, deeply furrowed.

Twigs: Slender, gray or brown, smooth; leaf scars alternate,
      half-elliptical, with 3 to several bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, red, smooth, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades ovate, pointed at the tip,
      heart-shaped at the very asymmetrical base, up to 8 inches long,
      up to ⅔ as broad, coarsely toothed along the edges, green and
      smooth on the upper surface, paler and smooth or with tufts of
      hair on the lower surface; leafstalks up to 2 inches long, smooth.

Flowers: Few in clusters on a long stalk attached to a paddle-shaped
      structure, each flower fragrant, greenish-yellow, with 5 petals,
      appearing in June and July.

Fruit: Hard, spherical but often with a short point at the tip, up to ⅓
      inch in diameter, light brown, finely hairy.

Wood: Light in weight, close-grained, strong, not durable.

Uses: Coarse construction, furniture, paper pulp, fuel.

Habitat: Rich woods.

Range: New Brunswick across to Manitoba, south to Texas, east to North
      Carolina.

Distinguishing Features: The large, heart-shaped leaves sometimes
      resemble the leaves of the Red Mulberry, but the leafstalks of the
      Basswood do not have milky sap in them. The Basswood differs from
      the White Basswood by the virtual absence of hairs on the lower
      surface of the leaves.

    [Illustration: BASSWOOD]


                             WHITE BASSWOOD
                       _Tilia heterophylla_ Vent.

Growth Form: Medium to large tree up to 70 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to 2 feet; crown broadly spreading.

Bark: Brown, scaly, deeply furrowed.

Twigs: Slender, pale red-brown, smooth; leaf scars alternate,
      half-elliptical, with 3 to several bundle traces.

Buds: Ovoid, red, usually smooth, up to ¼ inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades ovate, pointed at the tip,
      heart-shaped at the asymmetrical base, up to 6 inches long, about
      half as wide, coarsely toothed along the edges, green and more or
      less smooth on the upper surface, densely covered with white hairs
      on the lower surface; leafstalks up to 2 inches long, more or less
      smooth.

Flowers: Several in clusters on a long stalk attached to a paddle-shaped
      structure, each flower fragrant, greenish-yellow, hairy, with 5
      petals, appearing in June and July.

Fruit: Hard, more or less spherical, somewhat pointed at the tip, up to
      ⅓ inch in diameter, reddish-brown, finely hairy.

Wood: Light in weight, close-grained, strong, not durable.

Uses: Paper pulp, fuel.

Habitat: Low, moist woods.

Range: New York across to Missouri, south to Mississippi and Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The dense coat of white hairs on the lower
      surface of the leaves distinguishes the White Basswood from the
      Basswood.

    [Illustration: WHITE BASSWOOD]


                               WINGED ELM
                          _Ulmus alata_ Michx.

Other Name: Wahoo Elm.

Growth Form: Small or moderate tree to 60 feet tall; trunk diameter up
      to 2 feet, but usually much smaller; crown oblong and relatively
      narrow.

Bark: Dark gray, with shallow furrows.

Twigs: Slender, gray or brown, more or less zigzag, smooth, often with
      corky wings; leaf scars alternate, half-round, each with 3 bundle
      traces.

Buds: Narrow, pointed, brown, smooth or slightly hairy, up to one-fourth
      inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades elliptic to oblong-lanceolate, pointed
      at the tip, rounded at the slightly asymmetrical base, up to three
      inches long, doubly toothed along the edges, green and smooth or
      slightly roughened on the upper surface, paler and hairy on the
      lower surface; leafstalks short, stout, hairy.

Flowers: In drooping clusters of 2-7, appearing before the leaves
      unfold, greenish, hairy, small.

Fruit: Oblong, winged, up to one-third inch long, hairy along the edges,
      each wing notched at the top and surrounding a single central
      seed.

Wood: Heavy, hard, pale brown.

Uses: Tool handles, small wooden articles.

Habitat: Dry cliffs, wooded slopes, rarely low woods.

Range: Virginia across to Missouri, south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The corky wings identify the Winged Elm from
      all other Illinois elms except the Rock Elm. It differs from the
      Rock Elm by its shorter, hairy leaf stalks and its usually smaller
      leaves.

    [Illustration: WINGED ELM]


                              AMERICAN ELM
                          _Ulmus americana_ L.

Other Name: White Elm.

Growth Form: Large tree up to 80 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 4 feet;
      crown broadly rounded or sometimes flat-topped, usually with
      drooping branchlets.

Bark: Light or dark gray, furrowed, at maturity breaking into thin
      plates.

Twigs: Brown, slender, smooth or sparsely hairy, often zigzag; leaf
      scars alternate, half-round, each with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Broadly ovoid, reddish-brown, smooth or sparsely hairy, up to
      one-fourth inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades oval to elliptic, pointed at the tip,
      strongly asymmetrical at the base, up to 6 inches long and about
      half as wide, coarsely doubly toothed along the edges, the upper
      surface dark green and smooth, the lower surface pale and either
      softly hairy or smooth; leafstalks very short, usually yellow.

Flowers: In drooping clusters of 3-4, appearing before the leaves
      unfold, greenish-red, hairy, small.

Fruit: Oval, winged fruits up to one-half inch long, hairy along the
      edges, each wing notched at the top and surrounding a single
      central seed.

Wood: Heavy, strong, pale brown.

Uses: Flooring, farm implements, shipbuilding; frequently planted as an
      ornamental and as a shade tree, but greatly diminished in number
      by the Dutch Elm disease and phloem necrosis.

Habitat: Bottomland woods, along streams.

Range: Nova Scotia across to southern Manitoba, south to central Texas,
      east to south-central Florida.

Distinguishing Features: American Elm may be distinguished from the
      Winged Elm and the Rock Elm by its lack of corky wings on the
      branchlets. It differs from the Slippery Elm by its relatively
      smooth leaves and the lack of rusty-colored hairs on its buds. The
      Siberian Elm, which is also similar, does not have distinctly
      asymmetrical leaves. Hackberry leaves, which are also somewhat
      similar in appearance, have three main veins originating at the
      base of each leaf blade.

    [Illustration: AMERICAN ELM]


                              SIBERIAN ELM
                           _Ulmus pumila_ L.

Growth Form: Small tree to 35 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 1 foot;
      crown broadly rounded, with slender branchlets.

Bark: Gray or brown, shallowly furrowed at maturity.

Twigs: Slender, brown or grayish, smooth; leaf scars alternate,
      half-round, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Spherical, reddish-brown, up to ⅛ inch in diameter, somewhat
      hairy.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades short-pointed at the tip, tapering or
      rounded at the asymmetrical base, up to 7 cm long, up to half as
      broad, mostly singly toothed along the edges, smooth on both
      surfaces; leafstalks very short, usually smooth.

Flowers: In drooping clusters of 2-5, appearing before the leaves begin
      to unfold, greenish, small, without petals.

Fruit: Nearly round, winged fruits, up to ½ inch in diameter, not
      notched, smooth, 1-seeded.

Wood: Hard, heavy, pale brown.

Use: Grown chiefly as an ornamental and frequently reproducing around
      old buildings.

Habitat: Along roads, around buildings.

Range: Native of Asia; widely planted in the United States and
      naturalized from Minnesota to Kansas and eastward.

Distinguishing Features: The Siberian Elm is distinguished by its small,
      smooth, singly-toothed leaves.

    [Illustration: SIBERIAN ELM]


                              SLIPPERY ELM
                          _Ulmus rubra_ Muhl.

Other Name: Red Elm.

Growth Form: Moderate tree up to 80 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 4
      feet; crown broadly rounded or occasionally flat-topped.

Bark: Reddish-brown to gray, with shallow furrows; the inner bark
      becomes slippery when chewed.

Twigs: Rather stout, reddish-brown, with short, gray hairs; leaf scars
      alternate, half-round, each with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Nearly round, up to one-fourth inch in diameter, with
      rusty-colored hairs.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades oval to elliptic, pointed at the tip,
      strongly asymmetrical at the base, up to 7 inches long, about half
      as wide, coarsely doubly toothed along the edges, the upper
      surface green and very rough to the touch, the lower surface
      smooth or hairy; leafstalks stout, hairy, up to one-half inch
      long.

Flowers: In drooping clusters, appearing before the leaves unfold,
      greenish, hairy, small.

Fruit: Circular, winged fruits up to three-fourths inch in diameter, not
      hairy except over the seed, each wing surrounding a single seed.

Wood: Heavy, strong, dark brown.

Uses: Shipbuilding, farm implements, fence posts.

Habitat: Bottomland woods; along streams; rocky, upland woods.

Range: Quebec across Ontario to North Dakota, south to Texas, east to
      Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The rough, sandpapery texture of the
      asymmetrical leaves distinguishes this elm from all others in the
      state.

    [Illustration: SLIPPERY ELM]


                                ROCK ELM
                         _Ulmus thomasii_ Sarg.

Other Name: Cork Elm.

Growth Form: Medium tree up to 75 feet tall; trunk diameter up to three
      feet; crown narrow, oblong, with drooping branches.

Bark: Grayish-brown, with shallow furrows.

Twigs: Slender, brown, smooth or finely hairy, usually with corky wings;
      leaf scars alternate, half-round, each with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Lance-shaped, pointed, brown, more or less hairy, up to one-fourth
      inch long.

Leaves: Alternate, simple; blades oval to oblong, pointed at the tip,
      rounded at the slightly asymmetrical base, up to 4 inches long,
      doubly toothed, green, smooth, and shiny on the upper surface,
      paler and hairy on the lower surface; leafstalks up to one-half
      inch long, smooth.

Flowers: In drooping clusters of 2-4, appearing before the leaves begin
      to unfold, greenish-red, hairy, small.

Fruit: Oval, winged fruits up to one-half inch long, hairy, each wing
      with a shallow notch at the top and surrounding a single seed.

Wood: Hard, strong, heavy, close-grained, pale brown.

Uses: Railroad ties, farm implements, hockey sticks.

Habitat: Wooded slopes, rock ledges.

Range: Quebec to Ontario and Minnesota, southwestward to Kansas, east to
      Tennessee.

Distinguishing Features: Rock Elm differs from other elms in Illinois by
      its corky-winged twigs and its smooth leafstalks.

    [Illustration: ROCK ELM]


                             SWEET VIBURNUM
                         _Viburnum lentago_ L.

Other Names: Nannyberry; Wild Raisin; Sheepberry.

Growth Form: Small tree to 25 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 5 inches;
      crown rounded.

Bark: Reddish-brown, broken into irregular plates.

Twigs: Slender, grayish, sometimes with orange dots, smooth; leaf scars
      opposite, crescent-shaped, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Red, nearly smooth, long-pointed, up to ¾ inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades ovate, pointed at the tip, tapering or
      rounded at the base, up to 3 inches long, about half as wide,
      sharply and finely toothed along the edges, green and slightly
      hairy on the upper surface, yellow-green and minutely black-dotted
      on the lower surface; leafstalks up to 1½ inches long, sometimes
      rusty-hairy, winged.

Flowers: Many in broad, round-topped clusters, slightly fragrant,
      appearing during April and May, each flower small and
      creamy-white.

Fruit: Fleshy, oval to ellipsoid, blue-black, up to ½ inch long, sweet,
      containing a single stone.

Wood: Hard, heavy, close-grained, dark orange-brown.

Use: Sometimes planted as an ornamental.

Habitat: Rocky woods; woods along streams.

Range: Quebec across to Manitoba, south to Colorado, east across
      northern Illinois to Georgia.

Distinguishing Features: The Sweet Viburnum, like other viburnums, has
      opposite, simple leaves which are finely and sharply toothed. It
      differs from other viburnums in Illinois by its long-pointed
      leaves and its winged leaf stalks.

    [Illustration: SWEET VIBURNUM]


                               BLACK HAW
                       _Viburnum prunifolium_ L.

Other Name: Nannyberry.

Growth Form: Small tree to 25 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 6 inches;
      crown irregular.

Bark: Reddish-brown, broken into irregular plates.

Twigs: Slender, grayish, sometimes with orange dots, smooth; leaf scars
      opposite, crescent-shaped, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Brown, nearly smooth, up to ½ inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades oval to ovate, short-pointed at the
      tip, rounded or tapering to the base, up to 3 inches long and 2
      inches broad, finely and sharply toothed along the edges, dark
      green and smooth on the upper surface, paler and smooth on the
      lower surface; leafstalks up to ⅔ inch long, smooth, scarcely or
      not at all winged.

Flowers: Many in broad, round-topped clusters, appearing during April
      and May, each flower small and white.

Fruit: Fleshy, oval to ellipsoid, blue-black, up to ⅔ inch long, sweet,
      containing a single stone.

Wood: Hard, heavy, strong but brittle, coarse-grained, reddish-brown.

Use: Sometimes planted as an ornamental.

Habitat: Rocky woods.

Range: Connecticut across to Michigan, southwest to Kansas, south to
      Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: Black Haw differs from the Sweet Viburnum by
      the absence of wings along the leafstalks. It differs from the
      Rusty Nannyberry by the absence of rusty hairs on the buds and
      leafstalks.

    [Illustration: BLACK HAW]


                            RUSTY NANNYBERRY
                       _Viburnum rufidulum_ Raf.

Other Name: Southern Black Haw.

Growth Form: Small tree to 30 feet tall; trunk diameter up to 8 inches;
      crown irregular.

Bark: Dark brown, broken into square plates.

Twigs: Slender, somewhat rusty-hairy; leaf scars opposite,
      crescent-shaped, with 3 bundle traces.

Buds: Rusty-hairy, up to ½ inch long.

Leaves: Opposite, simple; blades elliptic to obovate, short-pointed or
      rounded at the tip, rounded or tapering to the base, up to 3
      inches long, about half as wide, sharply and finely toothed along
      the edges, dark green and usually smooth on the upper surface,
      paler and with some rusty hairs on the lower surface; leafstalks
      up to ¾ inch long, rusty-hairy.

Flowers: Many in broad, round-topped clusters, appearing during April
      and May, each flower small and creamy-white.

Fruit: Fleshy, oblong, to obovoid, blue-black, up to ⅔ inch long. sweet,
      containing a single stone.

Wood: Hard, heavy, strong but brittle, close-grained, dark orange-brown.

Use: Sometimes planted as an ornamental.

Habitat: Dry, rocky woods.

Range: Virginia across to Missouri, south to Texas, east to Florida.

Distinguishing Features: The most distinguishing characteristics of the
      Rusty Nannyberry are the rusty-hairy buds and leaf stalks.

    [Illustration: RUSTY NANNYBERRY]




                     Special Places to Study Trees


A number of places in the state of Illinois provide opportunities to
study and to observe woody plants. Some of the major ones are briefly
described below.


                          The Morton Arboretum

A good place to learn the trees of Illinois firsthand is the Morton
Arboretum at Lisle, some twenty-five miles west of Chicago. This
privately endowed educational and scientific institution is devoted to
growing all kinds of woody plants that will survive in northern
Illinois. On the Arboretum’s 1500 acres one can find large collections
of oaks, maples, elms, ashes, lindens, junipers, pines, firs, spruces,
and numerous other groupings of woody plants from places throughout the
temperate world.

Certain collections in the Arboretum are along designated trails and are
especially useful in learning to identify trees. Perhaps the most
popular is the Illinois Trees Trail, where native trees are identified
by plaques that show common and scientific names and give other
interesting information about the trees. Another is the Evergreen Trail,
which features conifers.

Some trails emphasize ecology or other aspects of biology but also
feature trees. One of these is the Thornhill Trail, a general nature
trail on which trees are prominent. Another trail links nearby nature
study areas, including a mini-prairie, a wild flower garden, a northern
coniferous forest, and a pond-marsh. A short garden trail, the Viburnum
Walk, is unusual in that it utilizes a grouping of Viburnums and their
relatives to illustrate some of the principles of plant classification.

Landscape plantings are another important feature in the Arboretum, and
the extensive forested areas provide a dramatic backdrop for cultivated
plantings that have been blended skillfully into the natural landscape.
These are especially spectacular in spring when flowering trees are in
bloom and in fall when the foliage is in color.

At the Morton Arboretum there is a continuous effort to learn more about
the adaptability of trees and shrubs to the special growing conditions
of northern Illinois, especially the soils and climate. The natural
forests are being used as an outdoor laboratory for ecological studies,
and certain cultivated collections are experimental. The Street Tree
Collection, for example, is a large experimental assemblage of various
trees thought to be suitable for street and shade purposes. The Heath
(Ericaceous) Collection is valuable in determining the cultural
requirements for growing certain azaleas and rhododendrons in northern
Illinois.

The Morton Arboretum has been designed for learning through outdoor
experiences. The grounds are open every day of the year, and visitors
are always welcome. A modest admission fee is charged for each car
entering. In the Visitor Center, an overall orientation is offered
through exhibits and audio-visual presentations explaining the purposes
and functions of the Arboretum. Groups planning to visit should request
advance information about seasonal features, current hours, special
programs, and eating facilities. The varied opportunities and abundant
facilities at the Morton Arboretum make visits both pleasant and
memorable.


                    Illinois Natural History Survey

The Illinois Natural History Survey is a research organization devoted
to the scientific study of the living natural resources of Illinois. It
is one of the Divisions of the Department of Registration and Education
and is administered by a Board of Natural Resources and Conservation,
consisting of the Director of the Department, the President of the
University of Illinois, or his representative, the President of Southern
Illinois University, or his representative, members and experts in the
fields of geology, biology, chemistry, forestry, and engineering.

The Survey is organized into sections, five of which are engaged in
scientific pursuits. These are aquatic biology, botany and plant
pathology, economic entomology, faunistic survey, and wildlife. These
sections pursue basic and scientific research in systematics, ecology,
environmental quality, and control of plant diseases and insect pests.
The zoological collections of the Survey, numbering about 8,800,000
specimens, rank among the largest and most valuable in the world. The
botanical collections are smaller in size. The vascular plant
collections number over 145,000 specimens that are most representative
for studies of distribution in Illinois. The mycological collections,
with more than 35,000 specimens, include numerous types that are basic
to scientific research.

The Survey is housed in the Natural Resources Building and the Natural
Resources Studies Annex on the campus of the University of Illinois,
Urbana. In addition, the Survey maintains special research facilities at
Fox Ridge State Park, Stephen A. Forbes State Park, Havana, Sullivan,
and elsewhere for studies of pond management, prairie chickens,
pheasants, waterfowl, fish, and wildlife.


                Southern Illinois University, Carbondale

Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, has both a Department of
Botany and a Department of Forestry where students may select courses
from a broad curriculum to study various aspects of plant life. Many
forest-oriented courses are available, and most of them include actual
work in the field. The University has an arboretum on campus where
ornamental species are emphasized. Guided tours of these arboreta, as
well as of the display greenhouse, can be arranged by contacting the
Chairman of the Department of Botany, Southern Illinois University,
Carbondale, Illinois 62901.


                         DEPARTMENT OF FORESTRY
               University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

The department has programs in instruction, research and public service.
The instructional program offers professional undergraduate training in
forest science and wood science and these are accredited by the Society
of American Foresters. Graduate training is provided only at the
Master’s level within the department. Doctoral work can be pursued
through interdisciplinary programs in genetics, ecology, and plant
physiology under the general direction of forestry staff who are members
of these respective faculties.

Research is conducted at the main campus, the Dixon Springs Agricultural
Center in southern Illinois (Pope County), Sinnissippi Forest in
northern Illinois (Ogle County), and at other smaller outlying areas.
Support is provided by the Agricultural Experiment Station and grants
from industry and governmental agencies. Projects cover a wide range of
subjects related to the production and utilization of wood as well as
the use of forests for non-timber values. The latter includes recreation
and watershed management, with special emphasis on the role of forests
and forestry in water quality.

At Dixon Springs the emphasis has been on the ecology and management of
pine plantations. These plantings represent plant communities that have
been interjected by man into the natural succession of abandoned
agricultural land to forest. Factors affecting the growth of pine, and
the effects of pine on soil conditions, stand composition, and the
regeneration of native hardwood species are being investigated.
Watershed management studies are also concentrated at Dixon Springs.

The 2,500-acre Sinnissippi Forest, a private estate provides the
department with research opportunities. A nature tail is maintained as
an outdoor laboratory that is widely used by both adult and youth
groups. Sinnissippi Forest emphasizes the fact that a managed forest can
be aesthetically pleasing.

Public service activities are carried on through the Cooperative
Extension Service and provide advice and information to landowners,
youth groups, and other citizens of the State. This is accomplished
largely through group meetings and demonstrations and direct replies to
individual requests for information. Major emphasis has been on
establishment of windbreaks on farms in the prairie region; promotion of
sound management practices for farm woodlands; and the care of trees in
plantations and on farmsteads. Extension education emphasizes the
development of an appreciation by Illinois youth for conservation of the
forest resource; the promotion among adults of sound management of rural
and urban woodlands; and program for primary and secondary industries
that concerns the conversion of wood into useful products.


                        Shawnee National Forest

Much of the forested land in the southern tip of Illinois is in the
Shawnee National Forest. The 257,000 acres of rolling topography in the
forest contain 208 different kinds of native, woody plants. Some of the
areas which have a high concentration of unusual plant life have been
designated Botanical Areas by the United States Forest Service. At these
areas, such as Little Grand Canyon, Jackson Hollow, Stone Face, and six
others, plant life is protected. These are excellent places to observe
many of the woody plants of the State.

At other areas in the Shawnee National Forest, various forest management
practices, such as selective timber-cutting, erosion control, and
watershed protection, can be observed.

Numerous recreation facilities are dotted throughout the Shawnee. At
many of these, nature trails have been developed which bring the hiker
closer to nature. Descriptive brochures are available for most of the
recreation areas. They may be obtained by visiting the district ranger
offices at Vienna, Elizabethtown, Jonesboro, or Murphysboro, or by
writing to the Forest Supervisor, Shawnee National Forest, Harrisburg,
Illinois.


                 White Oak, the State Tree of Illinois

In 1972, the school children of Illinois selected the white oak,
(_Quercus alba_ L.), as the state tree. It is truly representative for
it can be found throughout the state on a variety of sites. It grows to
its largest size on upland, cool, well-drained coves, slopes, and
terraces where it often reaches 100 feet of height and 3 feet of
diameter.

White oak is one of Illinois’ most valuable trees. It makes an excellent
shade tree of majestic beauty with a broad round head and wide spreading
branches. Commercially it is an extremely valuable species used for
lumber, veneer, barrels, furniture, flooring, and construction.

This species is also a part of our national heritage. In the war of
1812, sailors reported that during battle, cannon balls bounced off the
hull of the U.S.S. Constitution. White oak helped make her “Old
Ironsides” and a part of our history.


                       DEPARTMENT OF CONSERVATION
                          DIVISION OF FORESTRY

The Legislature has given this Division the responsibility for all
activities concerning the forest and tree resource of Illinois. The
Division strives to fulfill its responsibilities by:

—protecting the resource against all detrimental factors such as fire,
      insects and diseases, improper harvesting, etc.

—making the public aware of the importance of this resource to the
      state’s health and economy.

—motivating and providing technical guidance to forest and tree owners
      for proper management.

—practicing and demonstrating proper forest management principles on
      Department lands.

The main objectives of this Division are to promote and achieve on
suitable public and private lands the establishment, protection,
management, use, and perpetuation of our tree resource for all of the
benefits which may be derived from them.

The Division cooperates with and makes full use of federal, state, and
private agency programs, efforts and monies to achieve Division
objectives and benefit forestry in Illinois. Formal cooperative
agreements exist with the United States Forest Service, U.S.D.A. Soil
Conservation Service, Extension Service and other groups, associations
and clubs active in forestry and its related fields.

The efforts of the Division are channeled through five disciplines: fire
control, forest management, reforestation, marketing and utilization,
and urban and community forestry. Each of these sections has technical
leadership at state level plus resource specialists for field
accomplishments. These five efforts intertwine very strongly at field
level where all personnel carry out certain parts of these programs in
designated geographic areas.


                      ILLINOIS BIG TREE CHAMPIONS

The Division of Forestry is cooperating with the American Forestry
Association in an attempt to find the biggest trees of each kind in the
United States and/or in Illinois. If you know of a tree that you think
might qualify, send the following information to the State Forester’s
office in Springfield: species, trunk circumference in inches (measured
4½ feet above the ground); total tree height in feet; and, average width
of crown in feet. If your candidate appears to be a winner, a state
forester will be sent to determine the exact measurements. If it is a
winner your name, the kind of tree and its dimension will be placed on
our list. You will receive a certificate stating that you have found a
“Big Tree Champion.”




                  Index to Common and Scientific Names


                                   A
  Acer
      barbatum                                                        38
      negundo                                                         40
      nigrum                                                          42
      rubrum                                                       44-46
      saccharinum                                                     48
      saccharum                                                       50
  Aesculus
      discolor                                                        52
      glabra                                                          54
  Ailanthus
      altissima                                                       56
  Alder
      Black                                                           58
  Alnus
      glutinosa                                                       58
  Amelanchier
      arborea                                                         60
      laevis                                                          62
  Apple
      Iowa Crab                                                      182
      Narrow-leaved Crab                                             178
      Prairie Crab                                                   180
  Aralia
      spinosa                                                         64
  Ash
      Black                                                          138
      Blue                                                           144
      Green                                                          142
      Pumpkin                                                        146
      Red                                                            140
      Wafer                                                          232
      White                                                          136
  Asimina
      triloba                                                         66
  Aspen
      Large-toothed                                                  216
      Quaking                                                        220


                                   B
  Basswood                                                           298
      White                                                          300
  Beech
      Blue                                                            76
  Betula
      lutea                                                           68
      nigra                                                           70
      papyrifera                                                      72
  Birch
      Paper                                                           72
      River                                                           70
      Yellow                                                          68
  Box Elder                                                           40
  Broussonetia
      papyrifera                                                      74
  Buckeye
      Ohio                                                            54
      Red                                                             52
  Buckthorn                                                          274
      Carolina                                                       272
  Butternut                                                          160


                                   C
  Carpinus
      caroliniana                                                     76
  Carya
      aquatica                                                        78
      cordiformis                                                     80
      glabra                                                          82
      illinoensis                                                     84
      laciniosa                                                       86
      ovalis                                                          88
      ovata                                                           90
      texana                                                          92
      tomentosa                                                       94
  Castanea
      dentata                                                         96
  Catalpa                                                            100
      bignonioides                                                    98
      Common                                                          98
      speciosa                                                       100
  Cedar
      Red                                                            164
  Celtis
      laevigata                                                      102
      occidentalis                                                   104
      tenuifolia                                                     106
  Cercis
      canadensis                                                     108
  Cherry
      Wild Black                                                     228
      Choke                                                          230
  Chestnut                                                            96
  Cladrastis
      lutea                                                          110
  Cock-spur Thorn                                                    120
  Coffee Tree
      Kentucky                                                       152
  Cornus
      amomum                                                         118
      alternifolia                                                   112
      drummondii                                                     114
      florida                                                        116
      foemina                                                        118
      obliqua                                                        118
      racemosa                                                       118
      rugosa                                                         118
      stolonifera                                                    118
  Cottonwood                                                         214
      Swamp                                                          218
  Crab Apple
      Iowa                                                           182
      Narrow-leaved                                                  178
      Prairie                                                        180
  Crataegus
      calpodendron                                                   126
      coccinioides                                                   126
      crus-galli                                                     120
      mollis                                                         122
      pruinosa                                                       124
      puntata                                                        128
      viridis                                                        128
  Cypress
      Bald                                                           296


                                   D
  Diospyros
      virginiana                                                     130
  Dogwood
      Alternate-leaved                                               112
      Flowering                                                      116
      Gray                                                           118
      Rough-leaved                                                   114


                                   E
  Elder
      Box                                                             40
  Elm
      American                                                       304
      Rock                                                           310
      Siberian                                                       306
      Slippery                                                       308
      Water                                                          208
      Winged                                                         302


                                   F
  Fagus
      grandifolia                                                    132
  Forestiera
      acuminata                                                      134
  Fraxinus
      americana                                                      136
      nigra                                                          138
      pennsylvanica                                              140-142
      quadrangulata                                                  144
      tomentosa                                                      146


                                   G
  Gleditsia
      aquatica                                                       148
      triacanthos                                                    150
  Gum
      Sour                                                           190
      Sweet                                                          170
      Tupelo                                                         188
  Gymnocladus
      dioicus                                                        152


                                   H
  Hackberry                                                          104
      Dwarf                                                          106
  Halesia
      carolina                                                       154
  Hamamelis
      virginiana                                                     156
  Haw
      Black                                                          314
      Dotted                                                         128
      Green                                                          128
      Pruinose                                                       124
      Red                                                            122
      Scarlet                                                        126
      Urn-shaped                                                     126
  Hawthorn                                                       120-128
  Hercules’ Club                                                      64
  Hickory
      Bitternut                                                       80
      Black                                                           92
      False Shagbark                                                  87
      Kingnut                                                         86
      Mockernut                                                       94
      Pignut                                                          82
      Shagbark                                                        90
      Sweet Pignut                                                    88
      Water                                                           78
  Holly
      Swamp                                                          158
  Hop-tree                                                           232
  Hornbeam
      American                                                        76
      Hop                                                            192


                                   I
  Ilex
      decidua                                                        158


                                   J
  Juglans
      cinerea                                                        160
      nigra                                                          162
  Juniperus
      virginiana                                                     164


                                   K
  Kentucky Coffee Tree                                               152


                                   L
  Larch
      American                                                       168
      European                                                       166
  Larix
      decidua                                                        166
      laricina                                                       168
  Liquidambar
      styraciflua                                                    170
  Liriodendron
      tulipifera                                                     172
  Locust
      Black                                                          284
      Honey                                                          150
      Water                                                          148


                                   M
  Maclura
      pomifera                                                       174
  Magnolia
      acuminata                                                      176
      Cucumber                                                       176
  Malus
      angustifolia                                                   178
      coronaria                                                      180
      ioensis                                                        182
  Maple
      Black                                                           42
      Red                                                             44
      Silver                                                          48
      Southern Sugar                                                  38
      Sugar                                                           50
      Swamp Red                                                       46
  Morus
      alba                                                           184
      rubra                                                          186
  Mulberry
      Paper                                                           74
      Red                                                            186
      White                                                          184


                                   N
  Nannyberry                                                         312
      Rusty                                                          316
  Nyssa
      aquatica                                                       188
      sylvatica                                                      190


                                   O
  Oak
      Basket                                                         252
      Black                                                          270
      Blackjack                                                      250
      Bur                                                            248
      Cherrybark                                                     256
      Hill’s                                                         240
      Overcup                                                        246
      Pin                                                            258
      Post                                                           268
      Red                                                            264
      Rock Chestnut                                                  262
      Scarlet                                                        238
      Shingle                                                        244
      Shumard                                                        266
      Spanish                                                        242
      Swamp White                                                    236
      White                                                          234
      Willow                                                         260
      Yellow Chestnut                                                254
  Orange
      Osage                                                          174
  Ostrya
      virginiana                                                     192


                                   P
  Paulownia
      tomentosa                                                      194
  Pawpaw                                                              66
  Pecan                                                               84
  Persimmon                                                          130
  Pine
      Jack                                                           196
      Loblolly                                                       206
      Red                                                            200
      Scotch                                                         204
      Shortleaf                                                      198
      White                                                          202
      Yellow                                                         198
  Pinus
      banksiana                                                      196
      echinata                                                       198
      resinosa                                                       200
      strobus                                                        202
      sylvestris                                                     204
      taeda                                                          206
  Planera
      aquatica                                                       208
  Platanus
      occidentalis                                                   210
  Plum
      American                                                       222
      Munson’s                                                       226
      Narrow-leaved                                                  226
      Wild Goose                                                     224
  Poplar
      White                                                          212
  Populus
      alba                                                           212
      deltoides                                                      214
      grandidentata                                                  216
      heterophylla                                                   218
      tremuloides                                                    220
  Princess Tree                                                      194
  Privet
      Swamp                                                          134
  Prunus
      americana                                                      222
      angustifolia                                                   226
      hortulana                                                      224
      munsoniana                                                     226
      serotina                                                       228
      virginiana                                                     230
  Ptelea
      trifoliata                                                     232


                                   Q
  Quercus
      alba                                                           234
      bicolor                                                        236
      coccinea                                                       238
      ellipsoidalis                                                  240
      falcata                                                        242
      imbricaria                                                     244
      lyrata                                                         246
      macrocarpa                                                     248
      marilandica                                                    250
      michauxii                                                      252
      muhlenbergii                                                   254
      pagodaefolia                                                   256
      palustris                                                      258
      phellos                                                        260
      prinus                                                         262
      rubra                                                          264
      shumardii                                                      266
      stellata                                                       268
      velutina                                                       270


                                   R
  Red Bud                                                            108
  Rhamnus
      caroliniana                                                    272
      cathartica                                                     274
  Rhus
      copallina                                                      276
      glabra                                                         278
      typhina                                                        280
      vernix                                                         282
  Robinia
      pseudoacacia                                                   284


                                   S
  Salix
      amygdaloides                                                   286
      caroliniana                                                    288
      interior                                                       290
      nigra                                                          292
  Sassafras
      albidum                                                        294
  Shadbush                                                            60
      Smooth                                                          62
  Silver Bell                                                        154
  Sugarberry                                                         102
  Sumac
      Poison                                                         282
      Shinning                                                       276
      Smooth                                                         278
      Staghorn                                                       280
  Sycamore                                                           210


                                   T
  Taxodium
      distichum                                                      296
  Tilia
      americana                                                      298
      heterophylla                                                   300
  Tree-of-Heaven                                                      56
  Tulip Tree                                                         172


                                   U
  Ulmus
      alata                                                          302
      americana                                                      304
      pumila                                                         306
      rubra                                                          308
      thomasii                                                       310


                                   V
  Viburnum
      lentago                                                        312
      prunifolium                                                    314
      rufidulum                                                      316


                                   W
  Walnut, Black                                                      162
  Willow
      Black                                                          292
      Carolina                                                       288
      Peach-leaved                                                   286
      Sand-bar                                                       290
  Witch Hazel                                                        156


                                   Y
  Yellowwood                                                         110




                                 NOTES




                           DISTRICT FORESTERS


  1. MT. CARROLL (815-244-3655)
      Junction Rts. 78 & 88
      P.O. Box 105 61053

  2. OREGON (815-732-6184)
      Ogle County Farm Bureau
      P.O. Box 223 61061

  3. LISLE (312-964-8081)
      Morton Arboretum
      P.O Box 472 60532

  4. CAMBRIDGE (309-937-2122)
      301 East North Street
      P.O. Box 126 61238

  5. PRINCETON (815-875-3125)
      222 South Main
      P.O. Box 236 61356

  6. MACOMB (309-837-1124)
      W. Jackson Rd. (Hwy. #136)
      P.O. Box 335 61455

  7. PEKIN (309-347-5119)
      133 Parkway Dr.
      P.O. Box 795 61554

  8. HAVANA (309-543-3401)
      720 S. 10th Street
      P.O. Box 401 62644

  9. SHELBYVILLE (217-644-2411)
      Hidden Springs State Forest
      P.O. Box 148 62565

  10. CHARLESTON (217-345-2420)
      Rt. 16 & Harrison St. Rd.
      P.O. Box 129 61920

  11. HILLSBORO (217-532-3562)
      925 S. Main Street
      P.O. Box 603 62049

  12. CARROLLTON (217-942-3816)
      202 N. 5th Street
      P.O. Box 170 62016

  13. PITTSFIELD (217-285-2221)
      211 South Madison
      P.O. Box 244 62363

  14. SPARTA (618-443-2925)
      1 Mile E. on Rt. 154
      P.O. Box 21 62286

  15. CARLYLE (618-594-4475)
      Eldon Hazlet State Park
      P.O. Box 149 62231

  16. KINMUNDY (618-547-3477)
      Stephen A. Forbes State Park
      Rural Route 1 62854

  17. OLNEY (618-393-6732)
      200½ North Walnut
      P.O. Box 313 62450

  18. FAIRFIELD (618-847-3781)
      1404 West Main
      P.O. Box 206 62837

  19. MURPHYSBORO (618-687-2622)
      1010 N. 14th Avenue
      P.O. Box 188 62966

  20. HARRISBURG (618-253-7966)
      200 S. Granger St.
      P.O. Box F 62946

  21. GOREVILLE (618-995-2568)
      Ferne Clyffe State Park
      P.O. Box 67 62939

  ▲ MASON NURSERY
      R.R. 1, Box 71
      Topeka, 61867
      (309-535-2185)

  ⍟ UNION NURSERY
      R.R. 1, Box 182
      Jonesboro 62952
      (618-833-6125)

  ● MAIN OFFICE
      DIVISION OF FORESTRY
      North West Plaza
      600 N. Grand West
      Springfield, IL 62706

    [Illustration: Illinois Map]

  DISTRICT 1
    JO DAVIESS
    STEPHENSON
    CARROLL
    WHITESIDE
  DISTRICT 2
    WINNEBAGO
    BOONE
    OGLE
    DE KALB
    LEE
  DISTRICT 3
    McHENRY
    LAKE
    KANE
    COOK
    DU PAGE
    KENDALL
    WILL
    GRUNDY
    KANKAKEE
  DISTRICT 4
    ROCK ISLAND
    HENRY
    MERCER
    KNOX
  DISTRICT 5
    BUREAU
    LA SALLE
    STARK
    PUTNAM
    MARSHALL
  DISTRICT 6
    HENDERSON
    WARREN
    McDONOUGH
    FULTON
  DISTRICT 7
    PEORIA
    WOODFORD
    TAZEWELL
  DISTRICT 8
    SCHUYLER
    CASS
    MASON ▲
    MENARD
    LOGAN
  DISTRICT 9
    LIVINGSTON
    McLEAN
    FORD
    DE WITT
    MACON
    PIATT
    MOULTRIE
    SHELBY
  DISTRICT 10
    IROQUOIS
    CHAMPAIGN
    VERMILION
    DOUGLAS
    EDGAR
    COLES
    CUMBERLAND
    CLARK
  DISTRICT 11
    SANGAMON ●
    MACOUPIN
    MONTGOMERY
    CHRISTIAN
  DISTRICT 12
    MORGAN
    SCOTT
    CALHOUN
    GREENE
    JERSEY
  DISTRICT 13
    HANCOCK
    ADAMS
    BROWN
    PIKE
  DISTRICT 14
    ST CLAIR
    MONROE
    RANDOLPH
  DISTRICT 15
    MADISON
    BOND
    CLINTON
    WASHINGTON
  DISTRICT 16
    FAYETTE
    EFFINGHAM
    MARION
    CLAY
  DISTRICT 17
    JASPER
    CRAWFORD
    RICHLAND
    LAWRENCE
    EDWARDS
    WABASH
  DISTRICT 18
    JEFFERSON
    WAYNE
    HAMILTON
    WHITE
  DISTRICT 19
    PERRY
    JACKSON
    FRANKLIN
    WILLIAMSON
  DISTRICT 20
    SALINE
    GALLATIN
    POPE
    HARDIN
    MASSAC
  DISTRICT 21
    UNION ⍟
    JOHNSON
    ALEXANDER
    PULASKI




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.

—Material interjected into the eBook is enclosed in {braces}.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOREST TREES OF ILLINOIS (THIRD
EDITION) ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
